

===== PAGE 1 =====
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 06 July 2022
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.914876
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 1 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 914876
Edited by:
Liming Li,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
Reviewed by:
Xiaohong Sui,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
Paul Avan,
Institut de l’Audition, Institut Pasteur,
France
*Correspondence:
Albert M. Croner
albert.croner@tum.de
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Neural Technology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Neuroscience
Received: 07 April 2022
Accepted: 13 June 2022
Published: 06 July 2022
Citation:
Croner AM, Heshmat A,
Schrott-Fischer A, Glueckert R,
Hemmert W and Bai S (2022) Effects
of Degrees of Degeneration on the
Electrical Excitation of Human Spiral
Ganglion Neurons Based on a
High-Resolution Computer Model.
Front. Neurosci. 16:914876.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2022.914876
Effects of Degrees of Degeneration
on the Electrical Excitation of Human
Spiral Ganglion Neurons Based on a
High-Resolution Computer Model
Albert M. Croner 1,2*, Amirreza Heshmat 3, Anneliese Schrott-Fischer 3, Rudolf Glueckert 3,
Werner Hemmert 1,2 and Siwei Bai 1,2
1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Techni cal University of Munich, Munich, Germany, 2 Munich Institute of
Biomedical Engineering, Technical University of Munich, G arching, Germany, 3 Laboratory for Inner Ear Biology, Medical
University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria
After hearing loss retrograde degeneration of spiral gangl ion neurons (SGNs) has been
described. Studies modeling the effects of degeneration mo stly omitted peripheral
processes (dendrites). Recent experimental observations indicated that degenerating
SGNs manifested also a reduced diameter of their dendrites.We simulated populations of
400 SGNs inside a high resolution cochlear model with a cochl ear implant, based on µCT
scans of a human temporal bone. Cochlear implant stimuli wer e delivered as biphasic
pulses in a monopolar conﬁguration. Three SGN situations we re simulated, based on
our previous measurements of human SGN dendrites: (A) SGNs w ith intact dendrites
(before degeneration), (B) degenerating SGNs, dendrites w ith a smaller diameter but
original length, (C) degenerating SGNs, dendrites omitted . SGN ﬁbers were mapped to
characteristic frequency, and place pitch was estimated fr om excitation proﬁles. Results
from degenerating SGNs (B, C) were similar. Most action pote ntials were initiated in
the somatic area for all cases (A, B, C), except for areas near stimulating electrodes
in the apex with intact SGNs (A), where action potentials wer e initiated in the distal
dendrite. In most cases, degenerating SGNs had lower thresh olds than intact SGNs (A)
(down to –2 dB). Excitation proﬁles showed increased ectopi c activation, i.e., activation
of unintended neuronal regions, as well as similar neuronal regions excited by different
apical electrodes, for degenerating SGNs (B, C). The estima ted pitch showed cases
of pitch reversals in apical electrodes for intact SGNs (A), as well as mostly identical
pitches evoked by the four most apical electrodes for degene rating SGNs (B, C). In
conclusion, neuronal excitation proﬁles to electrical sti mulation exhibited similar traits in
both ways of modeling SGN degeneration. Models showed degen eration of dendrites
caused increased ectopic activation, as well as similar excitation proﬁles and pitch evoked
by different apical electrodes. Therefore, insertion of el ectrodes beyond approximately
450◦ may not provide any beneﬁt if SGN dendrites are degenerated.
Keywords: cochlear implant, computational model, human, spira l ganglion neurons, neural degeneration, ectopic
activation, personalized model, deep insertion

===== PAGE 2 =====
Croner et al. Degeneration Degrees on Neuronal Excitation
1. INTRODUCTION
In normal hearing humans, a sound consisting of a single
frequency will excite neurons in a limited and speciﬁc area within
the cochlea, with high frequencies exciting neurons more in the
base, and low frequencies exciting neurons more in the apex
(
von Békésy, 1960 ). This tonotopic arrangement of the cochlea
is also exploited for cochlear implants (CIs), where multiple
electrodes are placed in the cochlea at diﬀerent positions. The
coding strategy of the CI converts sound which is recorded by
a microphone behind the ear into stimulation currents deliver ed
to individual electrodes, which in turn stimulate distinct neuron
populations (
Loizou, 1999; Wilson, 2008 ). Overall, CIs are able
to restore speech understanding in otherwise profoundly hearing
impaired patients to a surprisingly high degree, which makes
them the most successful neuroimplants today. However, the
extent to which hearing ﬁdelity is restored in CI patients sti ll
diﬀers, with hearing performance varying strongly between
individual subjects (
Blamey et al., 1996; Holden et al., 2013 ).
There are multiple possible reasons contributing to this vari ance
in performance. One such reason may be that every human has
an individual cochlea, i.e., when two inner ears are implante d
with the same CI, diﬀering cochlear geometries may lead to
diﬀerences in electric current ﬂow. This is especially releva nt as
electric stimulation impedes the precision of neural excitat ion
compared to acoustic, i.e., with electric stimulation it is n ot
possible to perfectly exploit the tonotopic arrangement of the
cochlea. Imperfect exploitation of the tonotopic map manifest s
as e.g., a low number of independent frequency channels in CI
stimulation (
Croghan et al., 2017 ), or stimulation of unintended
neuronal regions (e.g., “cross-turn” stimulation, Kalkman et al.,
2014; “tip-shifts, ” Nelson et al., 2008 ). Another reason may
lie within the spiral ganglion neurons (SGNs) responsible for
the transmission of sound information, which may degenerat e
or die (
Glueckert et al., 2005 ) and thereby aﬀect the auditory
information transmitted to the brain.
In order to estimate how cochlear geometry and state of
SGNs, i.e., their morphology, inﬂuence the performance of CI
subjects in experiments, it would be necessary to measure bot h
cochlear geometry and SGN morphology. The former can be
measured to a limited degree in living patients, e.g., using
CT (
Nogueira et al., 2016 ). However, measurements in living
patients, especially of implanted cochleae, will only yield rou gh
measures such as the height and diameter of the cochlea. High er
resolution can only be measured post-mortem, e.g., using sli ce
preparations or µCT scans. Therefore, as cochlear measuremen ts
in living patients are severely limited, several volume cond uction
models of human cochleae were developed over the years.
Cochlea models employed to simulate CI stimulation started o ut
as manually created geometries, e.g., a model of an unrolled
tube (
Finley et al., 1990 ), or of a coiled, tapering tube ( Frijns
et al., 2001; Hanekom, 2001 ), including basic structures such as
cochlear scalae. Those manually created geometries were la ter
employed to generate “personalized” models, i.e., by ﬁtting th e
model geometries to measurements of actual human cochleae,
such as height, diameter, or post-mortem mid-modiolar cross -
sections (
Kalkman et al., 2014; Malherbe et al., 2016; Nogueira
et al., 2016 ). Those models, while including some degree of
personalization, were still based on simple geometries. A mor e
recent development is the creation of models based on high-
deﬁnition µCT scans of post-mortem human cochleae, includin g
segmentation of individual structures. As creating such de tailed
models is especially labor intensive, there exist only a small
number of those to date. Nevertheless, they oﬀer the advantage of
including ﬁne details of structures present in physical cochle ae,
which inﬂuence the current spread in the cochlea under CI
stimulation (
Bai et al., 2019; Potrusil et al., 2020 ).
Cochlear volume conduction models allow for examination of
current spread within the cochlea, but do not give informatio n
about whether the actual neurons in the auditory nerve
are excited. Therefore, they are generally combined with
multi-compartment neuron models, representing type I SGNs.
However, SGNs may manifest diﬀerent morphologies which
need to be taken into account, especially in profoundly hearing
impaired subjects who are candidates for a CI implantation.
One hearing-loss-induced change in SGN morphology is the
retrograde degeneration of peripheral neuronal processes, caused
by deaﬀerentiation to inner hair cells. Such neural degenerati on
has been observed in both animals (
Bichler et al., 1983;
Spoendlin, 1984; Wise et al., 2017 ) and humans ( Nadol, 1990;
Glueckert et al., 2005; Linthicum and Fayad, 2009; Rask-
Andersen et al., 2010
). Neural degeneration has, therefore, been
incorporated in several models, in most cases by modeling
neuron populations with both an intact peripheral process and a
completely missing peripheral process (
Rattay et al., 2001, 2013;
Briaire and Frijns, 2006; Smit et al., 2008, 2010; Snel-Bonge rs
et al., 2013; Kalkman et al., 2014; Malherbe et al., 2015; Pot rusil
et al., 2020 ). Intact and missing peripheral processes are the
extremes of neural degeneration of the auditory nerve, exclu ding
the actual death of SGNs. It is, however, not clear how the
degenerative process proceeds in between those two extremes,
especially for humans. A possible intermediate degenerative state
is the shrinking of peripheral processes’ diameter, as describ ed
by
Heshmat et al. (2020).
In this study, we present a detailed model of the human
inner ear, consisting of a high resolution ﬁnite element (FE )
volume conduction model of a human cochlea and a population
of modeled type I SGNs. The FE cochlea model was based on µCT
scans of an implanted human cochlea and included reconstructed
nerve ﬁber paths (
Bai et al., 2019 ). Neuron populations were
based on the multi-compartment model from Rattay et al.
(2013) and modeled 400 auditory nerve ﬁbers (ANFs) spread out
along the tonotopic axis. With the modeled neuron population,
diﬀerences in excitation behavior based on diﬀerent degenerative
stages were investigated, including an intermediate stage with
thin peripheral processes. In this study, the peripheral process o f
a modeled ANF is denoted as “dendrite” and the central process
as “axon.”
2. METHODS
2.1. Reconstruction of the Cochlea Model
The FE cochlea model with an implanted electrode array
was reconstructed from a set of µCT scans of a human
cadaveric temporal bone. The implanted cochlea model was
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 2 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 914876

===== PAGE 3 =====
Croner et al. Degeneration Degrees on Neuronal Excitation
FIGURE 1 | Left: A dissected view of the FE mesh of the whole head model. T he blue arrow indicates the location of the cochlea. Right: A zoomed-in view of the
cochlea (and the nerve), indicated by the blue arrow in the le ft image.
then placed in a human head model at the petrous part
of the left temporal bone, which was necessary to correctly
place the CI ground electrode. This resulted in a FE model
with 21,937,778 volumetric mesh elements, shown in Figure 1.
The trajectories of 400 ANFs spanning from the base to
the apex of the cochlea were reconstructed based on the FE
mesh of the auditory nerve. The lengths of the reconstructed
neuron paths ranged from 5.5 to 8.2 mm. Neuron paths
are illustrated in Figure 2. The complete FE model was
subsequently imported into COMSOL Multiphysics (COMSOL
AB, Sweden) for calculating the electric potential V in
a volume conduction model. The CI electrode array was
modeled representing a MED-EL (Innsbruck, Austria) Standard
electrode, which comprises 12 pairs of electrode contacts ( ≡
12 electrodes), and was based on the geometry of a dummy
electrode array physically inserted into the temporal bone
sample. The MED-EL Standard electrode is considered a lateral
wall electrode array. Note that the electrode array inserte d
into our preserved cadaveric temporal bone punctured the
basilar membrane at approximately 270 ◦ into the cochlea,
thereby traversing from the scala tympani into the scala
vestibuli. As consequence, the modeled electrode array was
situated in the scala vestibuli from electrode 6 upwards.
Traversal of electrode arrays into the scala vestibuli is re gularly
observed in implanted cochleae, with arrays either partially o r
entirely located in scala vestibuli (e.g., approximately 25% of
cochleae,
Wardrop et al., 2005 ; approximately 5% of cochleae,
O’Connell et al., 2016 ; Risi, 2018 ). The presence of scala
traversal may, however, be a limitation of the model. It
is yet to be studied whether the traversal would inﬂuence
modeling outcomes.
Electrode contact pairs were numbered with the most basal
electrode pair as “electrode 1, ” and the most apical electrode pair
as “electrode 12.” The CI stimulation scheme in this study wa s
monopolar: the current-controlled stimulus was delivered from a
single electrode, with the ground electrode placed extracochlearly
on the left temporal bone of the skull. Electrode-neuron distance,
i.e., the shortest distance from an electrode to either the
beginning of a neuron path or to the nearest point along a
neuron path, ranged from approximately 0.5 mm to 1 mm, as
depicted in Figure 3. For the purpose of calculating electrode-
neuron distance, the coordinate of an electrode was determi ned
as the center point between the two electrode contacts of a pair .
Finally, the electric potentials on all points along the ANF path s
were extracted from the FE simulation.
A detailed description of the reconstruction and electrical
properties of the FE model, as well as the reconstruction of
neuron trajectories, can be found in
Bai et al. (2019). Electrode
dimensions and the conductivity values of the FE model can
also be found in Supplementary Table S1, available in the online
version of this article.
2.2. Multi-Compartment Neuron Model
A multi-compartment model adapted from
Rattay et al.
(2013, 2001 ) was implemented. Our ANF model followed the
description in the original publication except for the morphology
of dendrites and axons. Simulations were run with a population
of 400 ANFs. Population simulation was done by simulating
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 3 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 914876

===== PAGE 4 =====
Croner et al. Degeneration Degrees on Neuronal Excitation
FIGURE 2 | A rendered image of the 3D cochlea model and the neurons with 1 .5-mm-long dendrites. The cochlear canal, as well as the imp lanted electrode, was cut
to provide a better view of the neurons. The “out-of-focus” n eurons in the image sit in front of the cut-plane. Note that th e diameter of the ﬁbers (and the somata) is
ampliﬁed for visualization purposes, i.e., they are not to sc ale.
the multi-compartment neuron model with extracellular elect ric
potential values obtained from the FE model at the 400 previously
reconstructed neuronal paths.
The model from Rattay et al. (2013) was originally designed
with a 1 µm dendrite diameter and a 2 µm axon diameter.
However, histograms from our recent measurements on dendrite
diameter exhibited a unimodal distribution for normal hear ing
cases with a maximum at 2 µm diameter, and a bimodal
distribution for patients with hearing loss, peaking at 0.5 an d
2 µm diameters (
Heshmat et al., 2020 ). Therefore, we used a
dendrite diameter of 2 µm in our model to represent “intact”
dendrites. Based on the ratio of diameteraxon
diameterdendrite
= 2 in Rattay
et al. (2013), the axon in our model was, thus, implemented
with a diameter of 4 µm; this also lies around the upper limit of
type I SGN axon diameters observed (
Arnesen and Osen, 1978;
Nadol, 1990; Nadol et al., 1990 ). In addition to “intact, ” non-
degenerated dendrites, we also modeled two further degenerative
states. Based on the measurements with hearing-loss cases, a
“partially degenerated" dendrite was modeled with a diamete r of
0.5 µm, and a “completely degenerated" dendrite was modeled
by omitting the entire dendrite, modeling the neurons with o nly
soma and axon. In both degenerated cases, the axon diameter
was kept identical to the “intact" case, with a diameter of 4 µm .
Heshmat et al. (2020) also included measurements on myelin
thickness in dendrites (peaking at 0.6 µm for normal hearing, and
at 0.6 µm and 0.15 µm for hearing loss), which were implemented
in our model as well, with “intact" dendrites having a myelin
thickness of 0.6 µm, and “partially degenerated" dendrites a
myelin thickness of 0.15 µm.
Regarding dendrite length, we implemented two versions, as
in
Rattay et al. (2001): one with a dendrite length of 2.3 mm,
and the other with a dendrite length of 1.5 mm, to account
for shorter dendrites in the middle turn of the cochlea and
longer dendrites in the base and apex (
Potrusil et al., 2020 ).
In a single simulation run, dendrite lengths were kept uniform
for all 400 neurons, whereas the axon lengths were adapted
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 4 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 914876

===== PAGE 5 =====
Croner et al. Degeneration Degrees on Neuronal Excitation
FIGURE 3 | Electrode-neuron distance for each of the twelve electrode s in the
model. The distance is displayed both as distance to the clos est point along
the beginning of the reconstructed neuron paths ( ≡ modeled peripheral
terminals), and as distance to the closest point along the en tire length of all
reconstructed neuron paths ( ≡ modeled ANFs).
by adding or removing node-internode pairs so that all ﬁbers
ended with an internode at the end of their reconstructed path s.
Intact ANFs started with their peripheral terminal (ﬁrst dendritic
compartment) at the beginning of the reconstructed paths, i.e .,
in the spiral lamina attached at the level of inner hair cells. As
described above, three degenerative states were implemente d for
the neuron population: “intact” dendrites, “partially degenerated”
dendrites with narrower diameter, and “completely degenerated”
dendrites with the entire dendrite removed. Hence, we have t he
following six combinations, also illustrated in Figure 4:
• FD2.3: Full (intact) Dendrite. 2.3 mm dendrite length and 2 µm
dendrite diameter.
• TD2.3: Thin Dendrite. 2.3 mm dendrite length and 0.5 µm
dendrite diameter.
• ND2.3: No Dendrite. Soma, as well as the axon, positioned
at the same location as FD 2.3 and TD 2.3, therefore, the ﬁrst
neuronal compartment (soma) oﬀset by 2.3 mm from the
beginning of the path.
• FD1.5: Full (intact) Dendrite. 1.5 mm dendrite length and 2 µm
dendrite diameter.
• TD1.5: Thin Dendrite. 1.5 mm dendrite length and 0.5 µm
dendrite diameter.
• ND1.5: No Dendrite. Soma, as well as the axon, positioned
at the same location as FD 1.5 and TD 1.5, therefore, the ﬁrst
neuronal compartment (soma) oﬀset by 1.5 mm from the
beginning of the path.
Parameters of the multi-compartment neuron model can be
found in Supplementary Table S1, available in the online version
of this article.
2.3. Processing
Neuron models were implemented in Python 3.5, using the
Brian2 package (
Goodman and Brette, 2009 ), and simulations
were conducted on a computing cluster in parallel using the
Thorns package (
Rudnicki, 2022 ). Diﬀerential equations were
solved using an exponential Euler method with a 1 µs timestep.
The current stimulus used for neuronal stimulation was a sin gle
biphasic (cathodic-ﬁrst) pulse with 40 µs/phase. For each of th e
six simulated degenerative states and 12 stimulation elect rodes,
the minimum current necessary to elicit an action potential ( AP)
in at least a single ﬁber, i.e., threshold, and all 400 ﬁbers wa s
determined. The range spanned between those two current values
would then deﬁne the electric dynamic range (EDR). Afterward ,
each degenerative state and stimulation electrode was simu lated
with 80 current stimuli linearly spaced along within the EDR.
For all simulations, voltage traces were saved and subseque ntly
evaluated to determine the AP initiation site for all amplitu des.
Initial results were the “excitation proﬁles, ” which show when
ANFs were excited, i.e., generated an AP , for a neuron population
within its entire EDR. To compare excitation proﬁle shapes of
diﬀerent degenerative states, the diﬀerence of individual ﬁb er
thresholds in dB was computed, using Equation 1,
20 · log10
( thra,i
thrb,i
)
(1)
where thr is the threshold of an individual ﬁber, a and b denote
the degenerative state, i.e., FD or TD for a, and ND for b, and i
denotes the individual ﬁber, numbered from 1 to 400.
To represent characteristic frequencies (CF) of individual
ﬁbers, ANFs were mapped to frequencies using the Greenwood
frequency map (
Greenwood, 1990 ). For mapping purposes,
relevant ﬁber coordinates were the positions of peripheral tips
of the ﬁbers, i.e., the starting point of the peripheral termina ls.
Fiber tip coordinates were transformed into 1-dimensional
coordinates, i.e., describing only the distance along the ﬁb er
tip trajectory, with the most basal ﬁber (ﬁber 1) denoting th e
starting point. 1-dimensional ﬁber coordinates were then divided
by total cochlear length (i.e., distance from the most basal t o the
most apical ﬁber along the ﬁber tip trajectory) and used as x for
the Greenwood equation (Equation 2). Note that in the origin al
equation
Greenwood deﬁned x as the fraction of cochlear length
with x = 1 at the basal end. As this is inverted to our deﬁnition,
it was necessary to replace x in the original equation with (1 − x),
resulting in Equation 2.
CF = 165.4 Hz · (102.1·(1− x) − 0.88) (2)
In addition, Laneau et al. (2004) observed that a model predicting
place pitch based on the centroid of the excited cochlear area
ﬁts well with the results from their pitch ranking experiments
on CI subjects. Therefore, we employed excitation proﬁles
to reconstruct an approximation of “perceived" place pitch,
based on the centroid of excited ﬁbers and the Greenwood
frequency map. The centroids were computed as the mean of
1-dimensional ﬁber tip coordinates of only the excited ﬁber s,
for any individual stimulation current. An illustration de scribing
centroid reconstruction and corresponding pitch is displayed i n
Figure 5. Note that it was not distinguished whether there was a
gap in excited ﬁbers (i.e., due to ectopic activation, e.g., Figure 5,
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 5 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 914876

===== PAGE 6 =====
Croner et al. Degeneration Degrees on Neuronal Excitation
FIGURE 4 | Schematic representation of an ANF for different degenerat ive states and dendrite lengths, depicted up to soma (not to s cale). Degenerative state is
indicated by name [FD, Full (intact) Dendrite; TD, Thin Dend rite; ND, No Dendrite] and dendrite length is indicated by th e subscript.
electrode 5), which could potentially lead to a perception of tw o
separate pitches instead of one. The reconstructed pitch was th en
further evaluated by computing the diﬀerence in pitch between
adjacent electrodes, for four selected percentages (5%, 10%, 1 5%,
and 20%) of EDR. Pitch diﬀerence was calculated in octaves, i.e. ,
log2
(
Fa
Fb
)
, with Fa being the pitch of the more apical electrode,
and Fb being the pitch of the more basal electrode.
3. RESUL TS
3.1. Neural Excitation
3.1.1. Absolute Threshold
Absolute threshold refers to the lower limit of the EDR, i.e. , the
minimum current necessary to elicit an AP in at least one ANF in
a simulated population. In Supplementary Figure S1, the voltage
traces of selected ANFs at and just below the absolute thresh old
have been included. Absolute thresholds, as shown in Figure 6,
ranged from approximately − 12 dB re 1 mA (= 0.25 mA) to
approximately − 4 dB re 1 mA (= 0.63 mA). In general, dendritic
degeneration lead to a slight reduction in the absolute thre shold,
which was unexpected. Compared to FD, absolute thresholds for
TD and ND were reduced in base and apex for 2.3 mm dendrites,
and over most of the cochlear length for 1.5 mm dendrites.
Within individual stimulation electrodes, absolute thres holds of
TD and ND were within approximately 2 dB diﬀerence compared
to their FD counterpart, and within 1 dB diﬀerence when
compared with each other. TD absolute thresholds were slight ly
below ND absolute thresholds in most cases.
3.1.2. Excitation Proﬁle
Excitation proﬁles depict the stimulation amplitude at which each
ﬁber was activated and include the location of initial “eﬀecti ve”
excitation within each ﬁber. Hereby, the “eﬀective” excitat ion
refers to the excitation that produces an aﬀerent AP. For example,
if a neuron is ﬁrst excited in its dendrite, but before the AP
propagates to the axon, it is excited independently in the axon
as well, then the initial “eﬀective” excitation is determine d to
originate from the axon. Excitation proﬁles for 2.3 mm dendri tes
are shown in Figure 7, and for 1.5 mm dendrites in Figure 8.
Ectopic activation was observed in the excitation proﬁles. He re,
ectopic activation is deﬁned as independent activation of reg ions
distant to stimulating electrodes; for example in Figure 7 TD2.3
activation from electrode 7 at approximately 150 Hz and 2 kHz,
as well as electrode 9 at approximately 30 Hz and 2 kHz.
For FD 2.3 (Figure 7), it could be observed that AP initiation
sites were mostly proximal to the soma, except for regions closeto
the electrodes, where AP initiation happened in the distal regi on
of the dendrite, especially for middle and apical stimulation
electrodes, but less so for basal stimulation electrodes. T his may
indicate that stimulation of neurons in the basal turn might be
aﬀected less by degeneration, as APs initiated in the somatic
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 6 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 914876

===== PAGE 7 =====
Croner et al. Degeneration Degrees on Neuronal Excitation
FIGURE 5 | Excited ﬁbers and corresponding centroids, exemplary for FD 2.3 electrode 9 (left) and electrode 5 (right). Electrode 9 feat ures a decrease and subsequent
increase of pitch corresponding to the centroids with incre asing stimulation amplitude. Electrode 5 features ectopic activation. For purpose of better visualization, we
included here only a selective number of stimulation amplit udes. The electrode position is mapped to its nearest ﬁber, in dicated by a black triangle. The left ordinate
shows the frequency map, right ordinate the position of ANFs along the spiral lamina (SL).
area are less likely to be inﬂuenced by changes in dendrite
morphology. Ectopic activation could be observed especially
for stimulation in the middle of the cochlea. Regarding TD 2.3
and ND 2.3, visual inspection showed very similar stimulation
patterns between each other. The activation initiated in the distal
region of the dendrites in the case of FD 2.3 was largely missing
in both degenerated cases, in spite of that dendrites were sti ll
present with TD 2.3. The most striking diﬀerence between the
two degenerated cases is that for TD 2.3, most APs initiated
just before the soma, while for ND 2.3, most APs initiated in
the soma. Excitation proﬁles for individual apical electrode s
(electrodes 9 and upward) showed very similar patterns among
each other, both for TD2.3 and ND2.3. Ectopic activation was very
prominent for both TD 2.3 and ND 2.3, especially in the middle
and apex, where in most cases individual ﬁber thresholds were
lower for ectopic activation than for ﬁbers near the stimulat ion
electrodes (e.g., electrode 7, activation at approximately 1 50
Hz). In summary, degeneration of 2.3 mm dendrites increased
ectopic activation, caused less to no stimulation in the dist al
region of the dendrite, and reduced diﬀerences between apical
stimulation electrodes.
In contrast to 2.3 mm dendrites, 1.5 mm dendrites ( Figure 8)
had the vast majority of APs initiated proximal to the soma,
even for FD 1.5, and more APs initiated in the axon for stimuli
at high amplitudes. FD 1.5 showed some initiations in the distal
region of dendrites in the apex, but far less than FD 2.3. Overall,
diﬀerences among FD 1.5, TD 1.5, and ND 1.5 were small, except
for the few distal dendrite activations in FD 1.5. Ectopic activation
was only prominent in the apex for all degenerative states (e.g .,
electrode 11, activation at approximately 1 kHz). Similar to TD2.3
and ND 2.3, excitation proﬁles for TD 1.5 and ND 1.5 showed little
diﬀerence between individual apical electrodes.
For ND, most APs were initiated in the soma. On
closer inspection, the vast majority of APs initiated in the
soma (approximately 93%) showed indistinguishable AP peak
timings and highly similar potential values (average diﬀeren ce
at approximately 0.01 mV) to corresponding postsomatic
compartments, i.e., APs initiated simultaneously in both
the soma and the postsomatic compartment (not shown).
Simultaneous AP initiation in both the soma and postsomatic
compartment may indicate an excitation that originated from the
axon hillock or axon initial segment, the interfaces between soma
and axon.
Considering results from short dendrites to be more accurat e
in the middle of the cochlea, and results from long dendrites
to be more accurate in the base and apex, the largest impact
of degeneration may be in the apex, causing prominent ectopic
activation and a small diﬀerence in areas stimulated by diﬀere nt
electrodes. Ectopic activation in the base and middle of the
cochlea was mostly cross-turn activation, i.e., activation at ± 360◦
to the electrode.
3.1.3. Individual Threshold Differences
Based on the excitation proﬁles, diﬀerences in individual
ﬁber thresholds between degenerative states were computed,
comparing how similar FD and TD were to ND. Diﬀerences
(dB) are displayed in Figure 9. In all cases, ND was more similar
to TD than to FD; the TD vs. ND diﬀerence median was on
average at approximately –0.5 dB, with interquartile ranges o f 1–
2 dB. With 2.3 mm dendrites, electrodes in the middle showed
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 7 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 914876

===== PAGE 8 =====
Croner et al. Degeneration Degrees on Neuronal Excitation
FIGURE 6 | Thresholds for individual stimulation electrodes and dege nerative
states, 2.3 mm dendrite on top, 1.5 mm dendrite on bottom.
outliers down to approximately –4 dB for TD 2.3 vs ND 2.3.
FD2.3 vs. ND 2.3 showed the largest diﬀerences, with diﬀerence
medians from approximately -3 to 0 dB, and interquartile range s
of approximately 3 to 7 dB. FD 1.5 vs. ND 1.5 diﬀerences were
larger than TD 1.5 vs. ND 1.5, but not as pronounced as for
2.3 mm dendrites. In general, diﬀerences between degenerati ve
states of 1.5 mm dendrites were smaller than diﬀerences betwe en
degenerative states of 2.3 mm dendrites, and diﬀerences betw een
TD and ND were much smaller than diﬀerences between FD
and ND.
3.2. Pitch
Pitch was reconstructed based on the centroid of excited
area and the Greenwood frequency map (see also Figure 5).
Reconstructed pitch for all electrodes and degenerative stat es
along each corresponding EDR is displayed in Figure 10. At
larger stimulus amplitudes (greater than approximately 20%
EDR), pitch of apical electrodes largely overlapped. This partly
applied to middle electrodes as well, especially for long dendrites.
Below approximately 20% EDR, however, pitch for diﬀerent
electrodes diﬀered depending on degenerative state and dendr ite
length, as detailed below. Note that for higher percentages
of EDR, reconstructed pitch would automatically converge to
approximately 1,700 Hz, corresponding to the middle of the
cochlea. For example, with 50% of ANFs excited, the average
excited position would always result within the innermost 50 %
of ﬁbers (i.e., ANF 101 to ANF 300, for 400 ANFs), therefore
the centroid of the excitation would correspond to a CF between
approximately 400 Hz and 6 kHz. Consequently, with 100% of
ANFs excited, the average excited position would always be at the
middle of the cochlear length, corresponding to approximately
1700 Hz.
For FD, the pitch at the absolute threshold was mostly
well spaced for all electrodes, with pitch usually evoked
close to stimulating electrodes. With increasing stimulus , at
approximately 10% EDR for FD 2.3 and 5% for FD 1.5, the
pitch of apical stimulation electrodes increasingly overlappe d.
In contrast, for both TD and ND there were overlapping
pitches even at the absolute threshold. There, for TD 2.3 and
ND2.3, electrodes 9–12 evoked pitch at approximately 30–40
Hz, which increased to approximately 80 Hz at 5% EDR. Note
that the Greenwood frequency map with parameters suggested
for humans starts at approximately 20 Hz (
Greenwood, 1990 ).
Evoked pitches of middle electrodes (5–8) were not close to any
of the middle electrodes but instead oﬀset toward either the apex
(electrodes 6–8) or the base (electrode 5). For TD1.5 and ND1.5, all
electrodes 9–12 evoked pitch at approximately 190 Hz (between
electrodes 9 and 10) at the absolute threshold. No pitch was
evoked close to electrodes 4, 7, 8, 9, 11, and 12 at the absolut e
threshold, with no pitch evoked close to electrodes 11 and 12 even
with increased stimulus. The pitch evoked by basal stimulati ng
electrodes was similar to FD pitch for all TD and ND. Yet another
interesting observation was a few cases of pitch reversals, i. e.,
an apical electrode generating a higher pitch than a more basal
electrode. Pitch reversals were seen with some apical electrodes at
speciﬁc ranges of EDR, e.g., electrode 12 generated higher pitches
than electrodes 9–11 for FD 2.3 at approximately 10–25% of EDR.
With increased stimulation amplitude, abrupt changes in
reconstructed pitch were often observed, especially for apical
electrodes. This can generally be attributed to ectopic acti vation,
where a new group of neurons is excited and thereby changes
the overall pitch (e.g., TD 2.3 electrode 7). In real CIs, however,
this might cause a second, parallel pitch perception instead of
a shift in pitch. In addition, while we investigated stimulati on
by individual, independent electrodes, in implanted CIs sound s
will likely activate more than a single electrode, therefore a
perceived pitch would be the outcome of a combination of
multiple activated electrodes.
In summary, FD showed mostly independent and tonotopic
frequency channels for diﬀerent electrodes, especially near t he
absolute threshold, but TD and ND both lead to the uniﬁcation
of several frequency channels, especially for apical electrodes. TD
and ND showed similar pitch values compared to each other. In
some cases, pitch reversals were observed.
3.2.1. Pitch Difference
Pitch diﬀerence, depicted in Figure 11, was mostly in the 0 to − 1
octave range. All conﬁgurations showed almost no diﬀerences
for apical electrodes when averaged over the four selected
percentages. However, note that for FD this was the case becau se
of pitch reversals occurring, and diﬀerences in individual ED R
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 8 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 914876

===== PAGE 9 =====
Croner et al. Degeneration Degrees on Neuronal Excitation
FIGURE 7 | Excitation proﬁles for 2.3 mm dendrites. Greenwood frequenc y mapping performed for all 400 ﬁbers, marked on the left ordin ate. Fiber position along
spiral lamina marked on the right ordinate. AP initiation si te is color-coded, soma marked with black color. Stimulatio n electrodes labeled on the left. Electrode position
is mapped to its nearest ﬁber and indicated by gray triangles, blue arrows mark ﬁbers at ± 360◦ to the stimulation electrodes.
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 9 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 914876

===== PAGE 10 =====
Croner et al. Degeneration Degrees on Neuronal Excitation
FIGURE 8 | Excitation proﬁles for 1.5 mm dendrites. Greenwood frequenc y mapping performed for all 400 ﬁbers, marked on the left ordin ate. Fiber position along
spiral lamina marked on the right ordinate. AP initiation si te is color-coded, soma marked with black color. Stimulatio n electrodes labeled on the right. Electrode
position is mapped to its nearest ﬁber and indicated by gray tr iangles, blue arrows mark ﬁbers at ± 360◦ to the stimulation electrodes.
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 10 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 914876

===== PAGE 11 =====
Croner et al. Degeneration Degrees on Neuronal Excitation
FIGURE 9 | Difference of individual ANF thresholds between ND and othe r degenerative states, computed as in Equation 1. Boxplots s how medians, lower and upper
quartiles, whiskers (encompassing values contained in qua rtiles ± 1.5 times the interquartile range), and outliers.
percentages were mostly non-zero. In contrast, TD and ND
showed almost no diﬀerences in the apex not only for the
averaged values but for most of the individual EDR percentage s
as well, indicating similar pitches evoked by diﬀerent apical
electrodes over an extended current range. This was especial ly
prominent for TD 2.3 and ND 2.3, where diﬀerences were close
to zero octaves for electrodes 8–12. TD 1.5 and ND1.5 diﬀerences
were close to zero octaves only for electrodes 10–12. Diﬀeren ces
for TD 2.3 were similar to diﬀerences for ND 2.3, and diﬀerences
for TD1.5 were similar to diﬀerences for ND 1.5.
4. DISCUSSION
The present study investigated CI excitation of ANFs with
diﬀerent degrees of degeneration, based on morphological
measurements on human SGN dendrites and a high resolution
FE model of a human cochlea. Recent measurements indicated
that intact human SGN dendrites possess a diameter of
approximately 2.0 µm and that degeneration of SGNs may
also manifest in a reduced diameter of approximately 0.5 µm
(
Heshmat et al., 2020 ). The cochlea FE model was based on
µCT scans of a human cochlea and, therefore, generated a
highly personalized model, including ﬁne details of cochlea r
structures down to the porous structure of the modiolar bone
(
Bai et al., 2019). The cochlea model was implanted with a MED-
EL Standard electrode array consisting of 12 electrode pairs an d
stimulated in a monopolar conﬁguration with biphasic pulses.
Potential distributions were obtained from the FE model and
used as a stimulus for a large population of Hodgkin-Huxley-
based biophysical multi-compartment neuron models adapted to
represent human ANFs (
Rattay et al., 2013), spread out along the
entire cochlea. Primary simulation results consisted of deta iled
excitation proﬁles covering both cochlear length and electr ic
dynamic range for all 12 electrodes of the implant.
Studies modeling retrograde degeneration of ANFs commonly
modeled degeneration by removing either the entire dendrite
or peripheral parts of it (
Rattay et al., 2001, 2013; Briaire and
Frijns, 2006; Smit et al., 2008, 2010; Snel-Bongers et al., 20 13;
Kalkman et al., 2014; Malherbe et al., 2015; Potrusil et al.,
2020
). This study included an “intermediate" degenerative stat e
as well, a thin dendrite with only a 0.5 µm diameter, based
on measurements from
Heshmat et al. (2020). A shrinkage
of dendrite diameter in the process of degeneration was also
observed by
Wise et al. (2017) in guinea pigs, though only
manifesting in reduced diameter of the axoplasma, but not
the surrounding myelin sheath. Diﬀerences between myelin
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 11 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 914876

===== PAGE 12 =====
Croner et al. Degeneration Degrees on Neuronal Excitation
FIGURE 10 | The reconstructed pitch along % of EDR. Pitch reconstructio n was based on the centroid of the excited area and the Greenwo od map. Basal, middle,
and apical electrode stimulations are marked by color, and i ndividual electrodes are marked by line style. Electrode po sition, corresponding to the pitch of its nearest
ﬁber, is marked with triangles.
sheath measurements may be due to examinations performed
on diﬀerent species, with
Heshmat et al. measuring humans and
Wise et al. measuring guinea pigs. Our study modeled axon and
myelin sheath diameter according to Heshmat et al. (2020) . In
addition, we modeled homogeneous degeneration in the entir e
cochlea. This is likely not the case in real implanted cochlea e,
where there may be heterogeneous degeneration. For example,
assuming that hearing loss correlates with degeneration of ANFs
since age-related hearing loss generally is more pronounced in
high frequencies ( Brant and Fozard, 1990; Wiley et al., 2008 ), it
could be concluded that basal ANFs are more likely to degenerate
than apical ANFs, at least for most aged implanted subjects.
Nevertheless, investigation of diﬀerent degeneration patte rns in
the cochlea was beyond the scope of this study. Surprisingly,
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 12 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 914876

===== PAGE 13 =====
Croner et al. Degeneration Degrees on Neuronal Excitation
FIGURE 11 | Reconstructed pitch difference between neighboring elect rodes. Differences displayed for 5, 10, 15, and 20% of EDR, as well as the average of the four
differences. Electrode pair refers to which electrodes wer e used to compute the difference.
results were largely identical between thin dendrite and no
dendrite states, especially in contrast to intact dendrite s tate,
for all investigated parameters, including absolute and ind ividual
thresholds, excitation proﬁles, and reconstructed pitches. This
may be attributed to the diameter of 0.5 µm being already very
close to failing to be able to transmit APs through the soma
when modeled as a deterministic model (<0.4 µm,
Heshmat et al.,
2020), leading to a largely “inactive” dendrite in terms of neuronal
excitation. As the diameter of 0.5 µm was picked to represent one
of two peaks in a quantity distribution, with the other peak bein g
2 µm, representing “intact” dendrites, simulating an additi onal
diameter other than the two values would be arbitrary. Therefore,
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 13 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 914876

===== PAGE 14 =====
Croner et al. Degeneration Degrees on Neuronal Excitation
it may be concluded that simulation of ANF degeneration by
only removal of dendrites is suﬃciently accurate. An importa nt
constraint to this conclusion, however, is that other cochl eae
and stimulation conﬁgurations (i.e., monopolar vs. multipol ar,
alternate pulse shape) may show larger amounts of excitation
in the distal part of the dendrite for TD than observed in our
investigation, where we considered only monopolar biphasic
stimulation. Therefore, multipolar stimulation might incr ease
the diﬀerence between TD and ND, making the simulation of
intermediate degenerative states necessary.
Absolute thresholds for individual electrodes were deﬁned
as the current necessary to excite at least a single ANF of a
population. Intuitively, one would expect that with increasin g
degeneration absolute thresholds would increase as well, a s
the nearest part of an ANF to stimulating electrodes in
lateral electrode arrays is generally the peripheral termina l
(
Stakhovskaya et al., 2007; Mistrík et al., 2017 ). Therefore,
degeneration would increase the electrode-neuron distanc e,
which is often attributed proportionality to the perceptual
threshold (
Pﬁngst and Xu, 2004; Goldwyn et al., 2010; Long
et al., 2014; Bierer et al., 2015 ). In this study, however, not
only an absolute threshold increase with degeneration was
observed, but also an absolute threshold decrease. This appea rs
counterintuitive only at ﬁrst glance, however, when inspect ing
AP initiation sites, it could be observed that the absolute
threshold was reduced with increased degeneration wheneve r
ﬁbers were initially excited proximal to the soma for FD. This
could be explained using the intracellular resistance Ra of the
dendrite: if the dendrite is reduced in diameter or removed,
dendritic Ra is increased. More speciﬁcally, from FD to TD
resistance would increase by a factor of 16 (approximately
1.6 M/Omega1 for 10 µm length of dendrite with 2.0 µm diameter, and
approximately 25.5 M/Omega1 for 10 µm length of dendrite with 0.5 µm
diameter), and for ND resistance would essentially increas e
to ∞ /Omega1 (Ra = resisitivity·length
radius2·π ). Such an increase in dendritic
intracellular resistance would lead to less or no outward cu rrent
ﬂow from the soma toward the dendrite, therefore facilitating the
charging of cell membranes in the somatic area when compared
to a neuron with a thicker dendrite. Therefore, whenever APs at
the absolute threshold were initiated in or at the soma for FD ,
this eﬀect would manifest in a reduction of the absolute threshold
for TD and ND. Conversely, this did not apply in all cases,
however. For absolute thresholds where APs originally initi ated
in the distal end of the dendrite, absolute thresholds tende d
to increase with degeneration. However, there were exceptio ns
where thresholds would still decrease, e.g., electrode 11 a s shown
in Figure 7, where ectopic activation initiated at the soma for low
currents already and compensated for threshold increase of ANFs
near the electrode. Threshold diﬀerences between degenerat ed
states TD and ND were small, with ND mostly displaying slightly
higher absolute thresholds. This could be attributed to APsin ND
being mostly initiated at the interface between soma and axo n,
which appears to be less “optimal” than AP initiation directly
before the soma.
While excitation of ANFs in natural hearing originates from
inner hair cells, and therefore, excites ANFs at their periphe ral
terminal, excitation of ANFs under CI stimulation has been
shown to happen at several distinct sites along the ﬁbers (
Miller
et al., 2003 ). Suggested initial excitation sites are peripheral
terminal, dendrite, and axon in general ( Rattay et al., 2001;
Briaire and Frijns, 2006; Kalkman et al., 2014; Potrusil et a l.,
2020), as well as areas proximal to somata ( Cartee, 2006; Cartee
et al., 2006 ). In general, APs in our model were initiated at
one of three “preferred" sites: the distal end of the dendrite,
compartments directly peripheral to the soma, or the interface
between soma and axon. Only for very large stimuli ( >10 dB re
absolute threshold) extended initiation in midst of the axo n was
observed, where stimulation may very well be above maximum
loudness levels acceptable for CI subjects (dynamic ranges o f
patients with CI are on average at approximately 10 dB for low
pulse rates
Kreft et al., 2004; Zhou et al., 2012 ).
Our results showed AP initiation in the distal end of the
dendrite happened only in areas near stimulation electrodes, and
for the most part only in the apex and when dendrites were intact
(FD), given that short dendrites hardly had any AP initiatio n in
the distal end of dendrites for electrodes in the middle of th e
cochlea. Overall, initiations in the distal part of the dendrit e and
the axon were the minority, especially for degenerated dendri tes
(TD and ND). Therefore, most APs initiated in the somatic
area, either directly before the soma (TD) or at the interfac e
between soma and axon (ND). In terms of excitation proﬁle
shape, diﬀerences were the smallest between TD and ND. Except
when TD was initiated in the distal end of the dendrite, the sam e
currents generally excited the same neurons for both TD and
ND. Initial excitation in the distal end of the dendrite for TD
happened only in a minuscule number of neurons in the middle
of the cochlea and in no case at the absolute threshold.
Ectopic stimulation, including cross-turn stimulation, is b oth
seen in modeling studies (
Frijns et al., 2001; Hanekom, 2001;
Briaire and Frijns, 2006; Kalkman et al., 2014 ) and discussed
or suspected in patient studies ( Frijns et al., 2002; Arnoldner
et al., 2008; Finley et al., 2008 ). Our results showed prominent
ectopic activation in the excitation proﬁles, especially for
degenerated dendrites and apical regions. Most importantly,
for apical stimulation electrodes and degenerated dendrite s, the
same neuronal regions were excited preferentially, essenti ally
independent of the stimulation electrode and likely generati ng
an identical pitch perception. Ectopic activation manifested a s
both cross-turn activation (e.g., Figure 7 electrode 5), and non-
cross-turn activation, i.e., neurons activated at an oﬀset position
to the stimulation electrode, but not at a distance of an entire turn
(e.g., Figure 7 electrode 9). The existence of ectopic activation
of less than 360 ◦ to the electrode position is less intuitive than
cross-turn activation but has been mentioned in literature before,
e.g., being suspected as the underlying cause for “tip-shifts "
in forward masking spatial tuning curves with CI patients by
Nelson et al. (2008). In summary, ectopic activation especially
occurred for degenerated ANFs, mainly impacting stimulatio n
in the apex. Stimulation in the base and middle of the cochlea
showed less ectopic activation for degenerated dendrites th an in
the apex, assuming longer (2.3 mm) dendrites in the base and
apex and shorter (1.5 mm) dendrites in the middle of the cochlea.
This was likely due to most APs initiating near the soma with
FD in the basal and middle turns. In contrast, with FD most
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 14 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 914876

===== PAGE 15 =====
Croner et al. Degeneration Degrees on Neuronal Excitation
activation in the apex happened at the peripheral terminal for
ANFs near the stimulation electrodes, which was absent with
degenerated neurons.
Excitation proﬁles give a good overview of the way the ANF
population is excited, but given that the purpose of a CI is to
elicit sound perception, such proﬁles are still abstract. In or der to
approximate the perception of the simulated results, stimulate d
neurons were mapped to place pitch using the centroid of the
excited area (
Laneau et al., 2004 ) and Greenwood’s frequency
map (Greenwood, 1990). Frequency mapping was performed for
the entire EDR. However, not the entire EDR is relevant, but
only the interval between perceptual threshold and maximum
comfortable loudness of CI patients. Maximum comfortable
loudness was arbitrarily estimated to correspond to 4 mm of
neurons excited along together with the organ of Corti by
Briaire and Frijns (2006). With an average Organ of Corti
length of approximately 33 mm ( Stakhovskaya et al., 2007 ),
this would correspond to approximately 10% of ﬁbers excited.
For this reason, the reconstructed pitch was only inspected in
detail for low percentages of EDR, up to approximately 20%
of EDR. Results showed that for FD, individual stimulation
electrodes generated individual pitches for low percentages of
EDR, albeit less so for apical electrodes. With degenerated
dendrites, however, pitches obtained for apical stimulation
electrodes (especially electrode 9 upwards) were very simila r,
which essentially meant that diﬀerent electrodes evoked the same
pitch perception. With electrode 9 positioned at 450 ◦ insertion
into the cochlea, it indicates that insertion of cochlear el ectrode
arrays deeper than approximately 450 ◦ may not provide any
beneﬁt when ANFs are degenerated. A similar observation was
drawn from the model of
Kalkman et al. (2014), where electrodes
beyond approximately 540 ◦ insertion stimulated nearly identical
regions in the cochlea when ANFs were degenerated. Increase d
pitch confusion in the apex, i.e., the inability to correctly r ank
electrodes according to their pitch, was also observed in pati ent
studies with deeply inserted electrodes ( Deman et al., 2004; Gani
et al., 2007; Landsberger et al., 2014 ). For example, Deman et al.
observed that for CIs with electrode insertion depth between 471
and 662 ◦ about half of their subjects had similar pitch percepts
for apical stimulation electrodes in pitch ranking experiment s.
Consequently, based on our results that degenerated ANFs le ad
to highly similar pitches in the apex, increased pitch confusio n
for deeply inserted apical electrodes could be an indicator of
the neural health of apical neurons. In addition to similar
reconstructed pitches for apical electrodes, our results sho wed
pitch reversals in some cases. Pitch reversals are deﬁned as pi tch
elicited from a more apically located electrode being perceiv ed as
higher than pitch elicited from a more basally located electr ode,
despite more apical positions corresponding to lower frequencies
on the tonotopic map of the cochlea. Pitch reversals have been
occasionally observed in psychophysical experiments as well,
e.g.,
Fielden et al. (2015).
In conclusion, “intermediate” degenerative states of ANF
dendrites in our model generally showed very similar eﬀects t o
completely degenerated ANF dendrites. The largest impact of
degeneration is expected in the apex, where diﬀerent electrode s
stimulate the same neurons for degenerated ANFs. Therefore ,
a deep insertion of electrode arrays into the cochlea may
not provide any beneﬁts for patients with degenerated ANFs.
However, the impact of degeneration for electrodes up to
approximately 450◦ insertion angle may be small. Nevertheless, it
is important to note that this observation is based on monopolar
biphasic stimulation of a single human cochlea. Multipolar
stimulation is expected to be more heavily impacted by neural
degeneration (
Goldwyn et al., 2010; Zhu et al., 2012; Long et al.,
2014; George et al., 2015; Heshmat et al., 2021 ), and diﬀerent
pulse-shapes are believed to preferentially stimulate diﬀeren t
parts of an ANF ( Rattay et al., 2001 ), which may increase the
impact of degeneration and induce more diﬀerences between
TD and ND. In addition, given that performance of patients
with CI often varies between individuals, we can not make any
judgment on how well the subject on whose temporal bone
our cochlea model was based would have performed with a CI.
However, we are currently working on building an extended
set of FE models based on additional high-deﬁnition scans of
human temporal bones. Therefore, the current investigation into
speciﬁc SGN morphologies presents a starting point for highly
personalized models which take into consideration the inﬂuenc e
of ﬁne details of cochlear structures. This will be expanded
in future studies building on the current work, including not
only additional cochleae but also investigations into furth er
stimulation conﬁgurations and SGN morphologies. Therefore ,
using a larger number of high resolution cochlea models,
we will investigate possible diagnostic methods for neural
health in CI subjects, and whether the impact of degeneration
on CI stimulation can be estimated based on preoperative
measurements (e.g., cochlea shape from CT scans), possibly
aiding in the selection of CI electrode design and insertion depth.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The datasets presented in this study can be found in online
repositories. The names of the repository/repositories and
accession number(s) can be found below: https://gin.g-node. org/
Croner/dendritic_sgn_degeneration.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
AC conducted the simulations and contributed to study desig n,
ANF cable model implementation, data analysis, visualizati on,
and manuscript writing. AH contributed to study design, SGN
morphology measurements, and manuscript revision. AS-F
contributed to study design, SGN morphology measurements,
funding acquisition, and supervision. RG contributed to SGN
morphology measurements and manuscript revision. WH
contributed to study design, data analysis, manuscript revi sion,
funding acquisition, and supervision. SB contributed to stu dy
design, FE model reconstruction, ANF path reconstruction,
manuscript revision, and supervision. All authors contribut ed to
the article and approved the submitted version.
FUNDING
This project was funded by the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 15 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 914876

===== PAGE 16 =====
Croner et al. Degeneration Degrees on Neuronal Excitation
Foundation)–Projektnummer 415658392, the Austrian Scien ce
Fund (FWF) Grant No. l4147-B, and within the project
“Modeling the electrical stimulation of the human cochlear
nerve based on segmented high-resolution micro-computer
tomography scans” under the D-A-CH program.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Dr. Frank Böhnke
for providing the original µCT scans of the cadaveric
temporal bone, Dr. Jörg Encke for his contribution to
the ANF path reconstruction algorithms, and Carmen
Casta ˜neda Gonzales for her helpful comments on
the manuscript.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.338 9/fnins.
2022.914876/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Arnesen, A. R., and Osen, K. K. (1978). The cochlear nerve in the cat:
topography, cochleotopy, and ﬁber spectrum. J. Compar. Neurol. 178, 661–678.
doi: 10.1002/cne.901780405
Arnoldner, C., Riss, D., Kaider, A., Mair, A., Wagenblast, J., B aumgartner,
W.-D., et al. (2008). The intensity-pitch relation revisited: mon opolar
versus bipolar cochlear stimulation. Laryngoscope 118, 1630–1636.
doi: 10.1097/MLG.0b013e3181799715
Bai, S., Encke, J., Obando-Leitón, M., Wei β , R., Schäfer, F., Eberharter, J., et
al. (2019). Electrical stimulation in the human cochlea: a computatio nal
study based on high-resolution micro-ct scans. Front. Neurosci . 13, 1312.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2019.01312
Bichler, E., Spoendlin, H., and Rauchegger, H. (1983). Degenerati on of cochlear
neurons after amikacin intoxication in the rat. Arch. Otorhinolaryngol . 237,
201–208. doi: 10.1007/BF00453725
Bierer, J. A., Deeks, J. M., Billig, A. J., and Carlyon, R. P. (2015) . Comparison
of signal and gap-detection thresholds for focused and broad coc hlear
implant electrode conﬁgurations. J. Assoc. Res. Otolaryngol . 16, 273–284.
doi: 10.1007/s10162-015-0507-y
Blamey, P., Arndt, P., Bergeron, F., Bredberg, G., Brimacombe, J., Fa cer, G., et al.
(1996). Factors aﬀecting auditory performance of postlinguistic ally deaf adults
using cochlear implants. Audiol. Neurootol. 1, 293–306. doi: 10.1159/000259212
Brant, L. J., and Fozard, J. L. (1990). Age changes in pure-tone he aring thresholds
in a longitudinal study of normal human aging. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 88, 813–820.
doi: 10.1121/1.399731
Briaire, J., and Frijns, J. (2006). The consequences of neural degeneration regarding
optimal cochlear implant position in scala tympani: a model approach. Hear.
Res. 214, 17–27. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2006.01.015
Cartee, L. A. (2006). Spiral ganglion cell site of excitation II: n umerical model
analysis. Hear. Res. 215, 22–30. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2006.02.011
Cartee, L. A., Miller, C. A., and van den Honert, C. (2006). Spiral gan glion cell
site of excitation I: comparison of scala tympani and intrameatal elec trode
responses. Hear. Res. 215, 10–21. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2006.02.012
Croghan, N. B. H., Duran, S. I., and Smith, Z. M. (2017). Re-examini ng the
relationship between number of cochlear implant channels and maximal speech
intelligibility. J. Acoust. Soc. of Am . 142, EL537–EL543. doi: 10.1121/1.5016044
Deman, P. R., van Dijk, B., Oﬀeciers, F.-E., and Govaerts, P. J. (2004). Pitch
estimation of a deeply inserted cochlear implant electrode. Int. J. Audiol . 43,
363–368. doi: 10.1080/14992020400050046
Fielden, C. A., Kluk, K., Boyle, P. J., and McKay, C. M. (2015). Th e perception of
complex pitch in cochlear implants: a comparison of monopolar and tripolar
stimulation. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 138, 2524–2536. doi: 10.1121/1.4931910
Finley, C., Wilson, B., and White, M. (1990). “Models of neural res ponsiveness to
electrical stimulation, ” inCochlear Implants, eds J. M. Miller and F. A. Spelman
(New York, NY: Springer).
Finley, C. C., Holden, T. A., Holden, L. K., Whiting, B. R., Chole, R. A.,
Neely, G. J., et al. (2008). Role of electrode placement as a contributo r
to variability in cochlear implant outcomes. Otol. Neurotol . 29, 920–928.
doi: 10.1097/MAO.0b013e318184f492
Frijns, J. H., Briaire, J. J., and Grote, J. J. (2001). The importance of human cochlear
anatomy for the results of modiolus-hugging multichannel cochlear i mplants.
Otol. Neurotol. 22, 340–349. doi: 10.1097/00129492-200105000-00012
Frijns, J. H. M., Briaire, J. J., de Laat, J. A. P. M., and Grote, J. J.
(2002). Initial evaluation of the Clarion CII cochlear implant: spee ch
perception and neural response imaging. Ear. Hear . 23, 184–197.
doi: 10.1097/00003446-200206000-00003
Gani, M., V alentini, G., Sigrist, A., Kós, M.-I., and Boëx, C. (2007). Implications of
deep electrode insertion on cochlear implant ﬁtting. J. Assoc. Res. Otolaryngol .
8, 69–83. doi: 10.1007/s10162-006-0065-4
George, S. S., Wise, A. K., Fallon, J. B., and Shepherd, R. K. (2015 ). Evaluation
of focused multipolar stimulation for cochlear implants in long-term dea fened
cats. J. Neural Eng. 12, 036003. doi: 10.1088/1741-2560/12/3/036003
Glueckert, R., Pfaller, K., Kinnefors, A., Rask-Andersen, H., and Schrott-Fischer, A.
(2005). The human spiral ganglion: New insights into ultrastructure , survival
rate and implications for cochlear implants. Audiol. Neurotol . 10, 258–273.
doi: 10.1159/000086000
Goldwyn, J. H., Bierer, S. M., and Bierer, J. A. (2010). Modeling th e electrode-
neuron interface of cochlear implants: eﬀects of neural survival, e lectrode
placement, and the partial tripolar conﬁguration. Hear. Res . 268, 93–104.
doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2010.05.005
Goodman, D. F. M., and Brette, R. (2009). The brian simulator. Front. Neurosci. 3,
2009. doi: 10.3389/neuro.01.026.2009
Greenwood, D. D. (1990). A cochlear frequency–position functio n for
several species—29 years later. J. Acoust. Soc. Am . 87, 2592–2605.
doi: 10.1121/1.399052
Hanekom, T. (2001). Three-dimensional spiraling ﬁnite element model
of the electrically stimulated cochlea. Ear. Hear . 22, 300–315.
doi: 10.1097/00003446-200108000-00005
Heshmat, A., Sajedi, S., Johnson Chacko, L., Fischer, N., Schro tt-Fischer, A., and
Rattay, F. (2020). Dendritic degeneration of human auditory ner ve ﬁbers and
its impact on the spiking pattern under regular conditions and during cochlear
implant stimulation. Front. Neurosci. 14, 1182. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2020.599868
Heshmat, A., Sajedi, S., Schrott-Fischer, A., and Rattay, F. (2 021). Polarity
sensitivity of human auditory nerve ﬁbers based on pulse shape, co chlear
implant stimulation strategy and array. Front. Neurosci . 15, 751599.
doi: 10.3389/fnins.2021.751599
Holden, L. K., Finley, C. C., Firszt, J. B., Holden, T. A., Brenner, C ., Potts, L. G., et
al. (2013). Factors aﬀecting open-set word recognition in adults with cochlear
implants. Ear. Hear. 34, 342–360. doi: 10.1097/AUD.0b013e3182741aa7
Kalkman, R. K., Briaire, J. J., Dekker, D. M. T., and Frijns, J. H. M.
(2014). Place pitch versus electrode location in a realistic computat ional
model of the implanted human cochlea. Hear. Res . 315, 10–24.
doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2014.06.003
Kreft, H. A., Donaldson, G. S., and Nelson, D. A. (2004). Eﬀects of pulse rate on
threshold and dynamic range in Clarion cochlear-implant users (L). J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 115, 1885–1888. doi: 10.1121/1.1701895
Landsberger, D. M., Mertens, G., Punte, A. K., and V an De Heynin g, P. (2014).
Perceptual changes in place of stimulation with long cochlear implant electrode
arrays. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 135, EL75–EL81. doi: 10.1121/1.4862875
Laneau, J., Wouters, J., and Moonen, M. (2004). Relative contributions of temporal
and place pitch cues to fundamental frequency discrimination in coc hlear
implantees. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 116, 3606–3619. doi: 10.1121/1.1823311
Linthicum, F., and Fayad, J. (2009). Spiral ganglion cell loss is un related to
segmental cochlear sensory system degeneration in humans. Otol. Neurotol. 30,
418–422. doi: 10.1097/MAO.0b013e31819a8827
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 16 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 914876

===== PAGE 17 =====
Croner et al. Degeneration Degrees on Neuronal Excitation
Loizou, P. (1999). Introduction to cochlear implants. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag. 18,
32–42. doi: 10.1109/51.740962
Long, C. J., Holden, T. A., McClelland, G. H., Parkinson, W. S., Shelton, C., Kelsall,
D. C., et al. (2014). Examining the electro-neural interface of co chlear implant
users using psychophysics, CT scans, and speech understanding . J. Assoc. Res.
Otolaryngol. 15, 293–304. doi: 10.1007/s10162-013-0437-5
Malherbe, T. K., Hanekom, T., and Hanekom, J. J. (2015). The eﬀect of the resistive
properties of bone on neural excitation and electric ﬁelds in cochlear implant
models. Hear. Res. 327, 126–135. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2015.06.003
Malherbe, T. K., Hanekom, T., and Hanekom, J. J. (2016). Construc ting a three-
dimensional electrical model of a living cochlear implant user’s coch lea. Int. J.
Numer. Method Biomed. Eng. 32, 2751. doi: 10.1002/cnm.2751
Miller, C. A., Abbas, P. J., Nourski, K. V., Hu, N., and Robinson, B. K.
(2003). Electrode conﬁguration inﬂuences action potential ini tiation site
and ensemble stochastic response properties. Hear. Res . 175, 200–214.
doi: 10.1016/S0378-5955(02)00739-6
Mistrík, P., Jolly, C., Sieber, D., and Hochmair, I. (2017). Challen ging
aspects of contemporary cochlear implant electrode array
design. World J. Otorhinolaryngol. Head Neck Surg . 03, 192–199.
doi: 10.1016/j.wjorl.2017.12.007
Nadol, J. B. (1990). Degeneration of cochlear neurons as seen in the spiral ganglion
of man. Hear. Res. 49, 141–154. doi: 10.1016/0378-5955(90)90101-T
Nadol, J. B., Burgess, B. J., and Reisser, C. (1990). Morphometric analysis of
normal human spiral ganglion cells. Ann. Otol. Rhinol. Laryngol . 99, 340–348.
doi: 10.1177/000348949009900505
Nelson, D. A., Donaldson, G. S., and Kreft, H. (2008). Forward-maske d spatial
tuning curves in cochlear implant users. J. Acoust. Soc. Am . 123, 1522–1543.
doi: 10.1121/1.2836786
Nogueira, W., Schurzig, D., Büchner, A., Penninger, R. T., and Würfel, W.
(2016). V alidation of a cochlear implant patient-speciﬁc model of th e
voltage distribution in a clinical setting. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol . 4, 84.
doi: 10.3389/fbioe.2016.00084
O’Connell, B. P., Cakir, A., Hunter, J. B., Francis, D. O., Noble, J . H., Labadie, R. F.,
et al. (2016). Electrode location and angular insertion depth are predi ctors of
audiologic outcomes in cochlear implantation. Otol. Neurotol. 37, 1016–1023.
doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000001125
Pﬁngst, B. E., and Xu, L. (2004). Across-site variation in detec tion thresholds
and maximum comfortable loudness levels for cochlear implants. J. Assoc. Res.
Otolaryngol. 5, 11–24. doi: 10.1007/s10162-003-3051-0
Potrusil, T., Heshmat, A., Sajedi, S., Wenger, C., Johnson Chack o, L., Glueckert,
R., et al. (2020). Finite element analysis and three-dimensional re construction
of tonotopically aligned human auditory ﬁber pathways: a computation al
environment for modeling electrical stimulation by a cochlear implant
based on micro-ct. Hear. Res . 393, 108001. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2020.
108001
Rask-Andersen, H., Liu, W., and Linthicum, F. (2010). Ganglion cell and ’dendrite’
populations in electric acoustic stimulation ears. Adv. Otorhinolaryngol . 67,
14–27. doi: 10.1159/000262593
Rattay, F., Lutter, P., and Felix, H. (2001). A model of the electri cally
excited human cochlear neuron i. contribution of neural substruct ures
to the generation and propagation of spikes. Hear. Res . 153, 43–63.
doi: 10.1016/S0378-5955(00)00256-2
Rattay, F., Potrusil, T., Wenger, C., Wise, A. K., Glueckert, R., and Schrott-
Fischer, A. (2013). Impact of morphometry, myelinization and synaptic current
strength on spike conduction in human and cat spiral ganglion neuron s. PLoS
ONE 8, e79256. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079256
Risi, F. (2018). Considerations and rationale for cochlear implant electrode
design - past, present and future. J. Int. Adv. Otol . 14, 382–391.
doi: 10.5152/iao.2018.6372
Rudnicki, M. (2022). Thorns. Available online at: https://github.com/mrkrd/thorns
(accessed March 25, 2022).
Smit, J. E., Hanekom, T., and Hanekom, J. J. (2008). Predicting ac tion potential
characteristics of human auditory nerve ﬁbres through modiﬁcation of the
Hodgkin-Huxley equations : research article. South Afr. J. Sci . 104, 284–292.
doi: 10.10520/EJC96819
Smit, J. E., Hanekom, T., van Wieringen, A., Wouters, J., and Hanekom, J. J. (2010).
Threshold predictions of diﬀerent pulse shapes using a human auditory n erve
ﬁbre model containing persistent sodium and slow potassium current s. Hear.
Res. 269, 12–22. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2010.08.004
Snel-Bongers, J., Briaire, J. J., van der Veen, E. H., Kalkman, R. K. , and Frijns, J. H.
M. (2013). Threshold levels of dual electrode stimulation in cochlear implants.
J. Assoc. Res. Otolaryngol. 14, 781–790. doi: 10.1007/s10162-013-0395-y
Spoendlin, H. (1984). Factors inducing retrograde degeneration of the
cochlear nerve. Ann. Otol. Rhinol. Laryngol . 93(4_suppl), 76–82.
doi: 10.1177/00034894840930S415
Stakhovskaya, O., Sridhar, D., Bonham, B. H., and Leake, P. A. (2 007). Frequency
map for the human cochlear spiral ganglion: implications for cochlear implants.
J. Assoc. Res. Otolaryngol. 8, 220–233. doi: 10.1007/s10162-007-0076-9
von Békésy, G. (1960). Experiments in Hearing. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Wardrop, P., Whinney, D., Rebscher, S. J., Roland, J. T., Luxford, W., and
Leake, P. A. (2005). A temporal bone study of insertion trauma and
intracochlear position of cochlear implant electrodes. I: comparison of
nucleus banded and nucleus contour TMelectrodes. Hear. Res . 203, 54–67.
doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2004.11.006
Wiley, T. L., Chappell, R., Carmichael, L., Nondahl, D. M., and Cruicksh anks, K.
J. (2008). Changes in hearing thresholds over 10 years in older ad ults. J. Am.
Acad. Audiol. 19, 281–292; quiz 371. doi: 10.3766/jaaa.19.4.2
Wilson, B. S. (2008). Cochlear implants: current designs and future po ssibilities. J.
Rehabil. Res. Dev. 45, 695–730. doi: 10.1682/JRRD.2007.10.0173
Wise, A. K., Pujol, R., Landry, T. G., Fallon, J. B., and Shepherd, R. K. (2017).
Structural and ultrastructural changes to Type I spiral ganglion neuron s and
schwann cells in the deafened guinea pig cochlea. J. Assoc. Res. Otolaryngol. 18,
751–769. doi: 10.1007/s10162-017-0631-y
Zhou, N., Xu, L., and Pﬁngst, B. E. (2012). Characteristics of de tection thresholds
and maximum comfortable loudness levels as a function of pulse rate in human
cochlear implant users. Hear Res. 284, 25–32. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2011.12.008
Zhu, Z., Tang, Q., Zeng, F.-G., Guan, T., and Ye, D. (2012). Co chlear implant
spatial selectivity with monopolar, bipolar and tripolar stimulation. Hear. Res.
283, 45–58. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2011.11.005
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be c onstrued as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizat ions, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may b e evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not gua ranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 Croner, Heshmat, Schrott-Fischer, Glueckert, He mmert and Bai.
This is an open-access article distributed under the terms o f the Creative Commons
Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or repro duction in other forums
is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyri ght owner(s) are credited
and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted
academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not
comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Neuroscience | www.frontiersin.org 17 July 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 914876