

===== PAGE 1 =====
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 17 June 2022
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2022.889992
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 1 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 889992
Edited by:
Andreas Bahmer,
University Hospital Frankfurt, Germany
Reviewed by:
Peter Cariani,
Boston University, United States
Yoojin Chung,
Decibel Therapeutics, Inc.,
United States
*Correspondence:
Raymond L. Goldsworthy
raymond.goldsworthy@med.usc.edu
Received: 04 March 2022
Accepted: 25 May 2022
Published: 17 June 2022
Citation:
Goldsworthy RL (2022) Computational
Modeling of Synchrony in the Auditory
Nerve in Response to Acoustic and
Electric Stimulation.
Front. Comput. Neurosci. 16:889992.
doi: 10.3389/fncom.2022.889992
Computational Modeling of
Synchrony in the Auditory Nerve in
Response to Acoustic and Electric
Stimulation
Raymond L. Goldsworthy *
Auditory Research Center, Caruso Department of Otolaryngo logy, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern Calif ornia,
Los Angeles, CA, United States
Cochlear implants are medical devices that provide hearing to nearly one million people
around the world. Outcomes are impressive with most recipie nts learning to understand
speech through this new way of hearing. Music perception and speech reception
in noise, however, are notably poor. These aspects of hearin g critically depend on
sensitivity to pitch, whether the musical pitch of an instru ment or the vocal pitch of
speech. The present article examines cues for pitch percept ion in the auditory nerve
based on computational models. Modeled neural synchrony fo r pure and complex
tones is examined for three different electric stimulation strategies including Continuous
Interleaved Sampling (CIS), High-Fidelity CIS (HDCIS), an d Peak-Derived Timing (PDT).
Computational modeling of current spread and neuronal resp onse are used to predict
neural activity to electric and acoustic stimulation. It is shown that CIS does not provide
neural synchrony to the frequency of pure tones nor to the fun damental component
of complex tones. The newer HDCIS and PDT strategies restore synchrony to both
the frequency of pure tones and to the fundamental component of complex tones.
Current spread reduces spatial speciﬁcity of excitation as well as the temporal ﬁdelity
of neural synchrony, but modeled neural excitation restore s precision of these cues.
Overall, modeled neural excitation to electric stimulatio n that incorporates temporal ﬁne
structure (e.g., HDCIS and PDT) indicates neural synchrony comparable to th at provided
by acoustic stimulation. Discussion considers the importa nce of stimulation rate and
long-term rehabilitation to provide temporal cues for pitc h perception.
Keywords: auditory neuroscience, cochlear implants, pitch perception, synchrony, auditory nerve
INTRODUCTION
Hearing is remarkable. People with the best sensitivity to mu sical pitch can discriminate tones
that are less than a tenth of a percent apart. Those with the best sensitivity can hear sounds
move in the environment by less than a degree. This precision re quires perception of timing
diﬀerences across ears on the order of tens of microseconds (
Tillein et al., 2011; Brughera et al.,
2013). Timing is essential to the auditory system. Special physiolo gical mechanisms have evolved
to encode timing of sounds with high ﬁdelity ( Joris et al., 2004; Joris and Yin, 2007; Golding and
Oertel, 2012; Bahmer and Gupta, 2018). Auditory nerve ﬁbers respond synchronously to incoming

===== PAGE 2 =====
Goldsworthy Synchrony in the Auditory Nerve
sounds for frequencies up to two thousand cycles per second,
arguably with useful timing cues up to ten thousand cycles
per second (
Verschooten et al., 2019 ). Despite the many
evolutionary developments required for precise coding of tim ing
in the auditory system, and despite strong arguments for the
importance of temporal ﬁne structure for music and speech
perception (
Lorenzi et al., 2006 ), timing cues are largely
discarded by sound processing for cochlear implants. This
article describes results from computational modeling of cochlear
implant stimulation followed by current spread and neuronal
excitation. Results inform how neural synchrony is discarde d
by common stimulation strategies, and how synchrony can be
restored by strategies that encode temporal ﬁne structure of
incoming sound into electrical stimulation.
Cochlear implants are remarkable. People who lose their
hearing can hear again through an electrode array surgicall y
implanted in their cochlea (
Svirsky, 2017 ). Nearly a million
people can hear because of cochlear implants. The quality of
hearing is impressive with most recipients able to understand
spoken speech in quiet without relying on lip-reading or other
visual cues (
Niparko et al., 2010 ). Music appreciation and
speech reception in noise, however, tend to be poor ( Looi
et al., 2012 ). The fact that hearing with cochlear implants is
not as good as normal is not surprising. Cochlear implants
are limited in their ability to stimulate diﬀerent regions of the
auditory nerve (
Middlebrooks and Snyder, 2007 ). The auditory
nerve is comprised of ∼ 30–40 thousand nerve ﬁbers while
cochlear implants use at most 22 stimulating electrodes ( Loizou,
1999; Liberman et al., 2016 ). Furthermore, electrical current
broadly spreads in the cochlea degrading the spatial speciﬁcit y
of stimulation (Landsberger et al., 2012).
This limit on spatial speciﬁcity is in sharp contrast to
the capacity of cochlear implants to stimulate with temporal
precision. Most cochlear implants control stimulation timing
with microsecond precision (
Shannon, 1992 ). This exquisite
temporal precision, however, is poorly used by conventional
sound processing. The most common sound processing for
cochlear implants, Advanced Combinatorial Encoders (ACE),
used on Cochlear Corporation devices, discards temporal
ﬁne structure in favor of encoding slowly varying envelope
oscillations up to 300 cycles per second, even though there isclear
evidence that timing information is important at least up to 2 –
4 thousand cycles per second (
Dynes and Delgutte, 1992; Oertel
et al., 2000; Joris et al., 2004; Verschooten et al., 2019 ).
There are historical reasons why ACE became commonly
used today. Early sound processing for cochlear implants
included simultaneous analog stimulation and strategies b ased
on speech feature extraction (
Loizou, 1999). Simultaneous analog
stimulation caused interference between electrodes that w as
diﬃcult to control and that produced unwanted ﬂuctuations
in loudness (
Wilson and Dorman, 2008, 2018 ). Strategies built
on speech feature extraction suﬀered from a diﬀerent problem.
Those strategies were limited by challenges of estimating
speech features—fundamental and formant frequencies—in
noisy environments. Consequently, the forerunner of the AC E
strategy, known as Spectral Peak (SPEAK), broke through as
a widely successful strategy based on amplitude modulation
of pulsatile stimulation. By encoding spectral maxima direct ly,
these stimulation strategies reliably conveyed essential speech
information. This approach has consequently been referred to a s
speech processing rather than sound processing since it is quit e
eﬀective for speech but less so for music.
Attempts have been made over recent decades to preserve
this eﬀective encoding of speech features provided by strategi es
like SPEAK and ACE while enhancing temporal information
important for perception of pitch and melody in music. Peak-
Derived Timing (PDT) triggers pulse timings based on the
temporal ﬁne structure of sound (
van Hoesel and Tyler, 2003; van
Hoesel, 2007; V andali and van Hoesel, 2011 ). With PDT , sound
is separated into overlapping frequency bands as done for ACE,
but rather than discarding temporal ﬁne structure, PDT trigg ers
pulse timings based on local peaks in the ﬁltered signal of each
processing channel. A similar strategy was developed for MED-
EL cochlear implants referred to as Fine Structure Processin g
(FSP), which schedules pulse timings on zero crossing ratherthan
peaks, but the same principal applies. Further, while PDT applied
the stimulus-derived timing for every electrode, FSP origi nally
only applied the ﬁne structure processing to the most apical
electrode corresponding to bandpass ﬁltering center frequen cies
up to 250 Hz (
Riss et al., 2014 ). V ariations of FSP have since
been developed that use higher stimulation rates and present
ﬁne structure to the four most apical electrodes correspondin g
to bandpass ﬁlter center frequencies up to 950 Hz (FS4:
Riss et al.,
2014, 2016).
Results with such temporal encoding strategies have been
mixed. Studies of PDT found little to no beneﬁt on either
pitch perception or spatial hearing (
van Hoesel and Tyler, 2003;
van Hoesel, 2007; V andali and van Hoesel, 2011 ). Early reports
for FSP found small but signiﬁcant beneﬁts on pitch without
detriment to speech (
Riss et al., 2014, 2016 ). More promising,
recent studies suggest that beneﬁts for pitch perception emerg e
from experience with the newly encoded information, with
continued beneﬁts after extended experience (
Riss et al., 2016 ).
There are many challenges to determining whether new strategies
achieve the desired outcome of better encoding of temporal
cues for pitch. Experience may be needed to fully learn to
use these cues. Since long-term rehabilitation may be neede d
to learn how to use these cues, tools are needed to better
characterize how well these cues are encoded for diﬀerent
stimulation strategies. Computational models of current spr ead
and neural excitation can explicitly characterize cues avai lable in
the auditory nerve in response to cochlear implant stimulatio n.
Careful characterization of these cues clariﬁes the extent t hat
pitch perception of cochlear implant users is limited by the
availability of these cues rather than by the brain’s abilit y to learn
to use them.
This article considers computational neural modeling of
spatial and temporal cues in the auditory-nerve response for pitch
perception. Cochlear implants can transmit spatial excitation
cues with more deeply inserted electrodes evoking lower pitch es
(
Shannon, 1983; Landsberger and Galvin, 2011 ). Cochlear
implants also convey temporal cues with higher stimulation or
modulation rates providing higher pitches (
Tong et al., 1982;
Zeng, 2002 ). There is considerable debate regarding optimal
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 2 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 889992

===== PAGE 3 =====
Goldsworthy Synchrony in the Auditory Nerve
use of spatial and temporal cues for pitch perception for both
acoustic and electric hearing (
Eddington et al., 1978; Loeb, 2005;
Cedolin and Delgutte, 2010; Kong and Carlyon, 2010; Oxenham
et al., 2011; Miyazono and Moore, 2013; Marimuthu et al., 2016;
Verschooten et al., 2019
).
While it is unclear to what extent spatial and temporal
cues contribute to pitch, the resulting resolution in normal
hearing allows listeners to discriminate frequency diﬀeren ces
<1% for a wide range of conditions (
Moore et al., 2008; Micheyl
et al., 2012 ). The best cochlear implant users despite having at
most 22 stimulating electrodes, and despite discarding tempo ral
ﬁne structure, can distinguish pure tones based on frequency
diﬀerences of about 1–5% from 500 to 2,000 Hz depending
on frequency allocation of clinical processing (
Goldsworthy
et al., 2013; Goldsworthy, 2015 ). Pitch perception for complex
tones, however, is comparably worse with cochlear implant use rs
typically only able to discriminate diﬀerences in fundamenta l
frequency of 5 to 20% in the ecologically essential range of 1 10–
440 Hz (Goldsworthy et al., 2013; Goldsworthy, 2015 ). While it
is diﬃcult to characterize contributions of spatial and tempo ral
cues for complex pitch (Carlyon and Deeks, 2002; Oxenham et al.,
2004, 2011 ), work has clariﬁed the extent that these cues are
present and distributed in the auditory-nerve response ( Cariani
and Delgutte, 1996a; Plack and Oxenham, 2005 ).
For complex tones with fundamental frequencies in the range
of human voices (100 to 300 Hz), cochlear implant ﬁltering does
not provide tonotopically resolved harmonic structure (
Swanson
et al., 2019 ). Consequently, implant users rely on temporal
cues for discriminating complex tones in this range. Temporal
cues for pitch become less eﬀective with increasing rates with
marked deterioration of resolution between 200 and 300 Hz.
This leads many cochlear implant users to express frustration
with melody recognition above middle C ( ∼ 262 Hz) (
Looi et al.,
2012). It has been shown that discrimination improves for
fundamental frequencies higher than 300 Hz, likely because of
better access to place cues to make up for the impoverished rate
cues (
Goldsworthy, 2015; Swanson et al., 2019 ).
In the present article, the spatial and temporal cues
associated with the frequency of pure tones and the fundament al
frequency of complex tones is characterized in acoustic hear ing
using a computational model of the auditory periphery.
This computational model has been rigorously validated on
physiological recordings and behavioral measures (
Zhang et al.,
2001; Zilany et al., 2009, 2014 ). The same analyses are
then performed to characterize the spatial and temporal cues
available in cochlear implant stimulation followed by curren t
spread and a point process model of neural excitation (
Litvak
et al., 2007; Goldwyn et al., 2012 ). Three cochlear implant
stimulation strategies are examined including Continuous
Interleaved Sampling (CIS), High-Deﬁnition CIS (HDCIS), an d
Peak-Derived Timing (PDT). These strategies were selected as
representative of conventional stimulation that discards temporal
ﬁne structure (CIS) and newer strategies that actively encod e
acoustic temporal ﬁne structure into electrical stimulatio n
(HDCIS and PDT). Finally, an analysis of how stimulation rat e
aﬀects neural synchrony is conducted to characterize information
loss for devices that cannot stimulate with high pulse rates. The
results inform the extent that acoustic temporal ﬁne structu re of
incoming sound is transmitted into neural excitation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Overview
Computational models were used to compare neural synchrony
for acoustic and electric stimulation. Neural synchrony wa s
quantiﬁed as vector strength. For acoustic stimulation, au ditory-
nerve ﬁbers were simulated based on a computational model of
the auditory periphery that has been validated with extensive
physiological data (
Zilany et al., 2014 ). For electric stimulation,
cochlear implant stimulation was based on emulations of thre e
stimulation strategies that diﬀer in how temporal features
of incoming sounds are encoded. The three strategies were
Continuous Interleaved Sampling (CIS), High-Deﬁnition CIS
(HDCIS), and Peak-Derived Timing (PDT). These strategies
were probed using pure and complex tones. Output electrical
stimulation patterns were processed through a model of curren t
spread followed by a point process model of neuronal excitation
(
Litvak et al., 2007; Goldwyn et al., 2012 ).
Stimuli
Stimuli were pure and complex tones generated in MATLAB R⃝
as 30 ms tones. Pure tones were generated as sinusoids in sine
phase. Complex tones were generated by summing sinusoids
in sine phase. Integer harmonic components were included
from the fundamental to the highest harmonic <10,000 cycles
per second (Hz). Harmonic components were summed with
spectral attenuation of − 6 dB per octave as typically occurs for
complex sounds in nature (
McDermott and Oxenham, 2008). All
stimuli were calibrated to an input level of 65 dB sound pressur e
level (SPL) for the phenomenological auditory-nerve model a nd
to have a peak value of one for cochlear implant processing.
Computational Modeling of Auditory-Nerve
Response to Acoustic and Electric
Stimulation
Phenomenological Auditory-Nerve Model
Auditory-nerve activity was modeled using a phenomenologica l
model of auditory processing that has been developed across
multiple institutions (
Zilany et al., 2014 ). This computational
model includes aspects of the auditory periphery including a
middle-ear ﬁlter, a feed-forward control-path, adaptive ﬁlte ring
to emulate cochlear mechanics, inner hair-cell transducti on
kinematics followed by a synapse model and discharge generator.
Thus, it models multiple aspects of auditory physiology and
has been validated with a wide range of physiological data
as well as behavioral data from humans. While the model
captures diverse aspects of the auditory periphery, it is
referred to here as an auditory-nerve model since the focus
is on the auditory-nerve response to acoustic stimuli. In
this article, it will be referred to as the phenomenological
auditory-nerve model to distinguish it from the point process
neuron model used in cochlear implant simulations. The
phenomenological auditory-nerve model was implemented
with 256 ﬁbers with logarithmically spaced characteristic
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 3 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 889992

===== PAGE 4 =====
Goldsworthy Synchrony in the Auditory Nerve
frequencies from 125 to 8,000 Hz. The input level for all
stimuli was speciﬁed as 65 dB SPL. The species parameter
was set to human, which uses basilar-membrane tuning
based on (
Shera et al., 2002 ). The inner and outer hair-
cell scaling factor was speciﬁed to model normal hearing.
All three available ﬁber types (low, medium, and high levels
of spontaneous discharge) were examined but signiﬁcant
diﬀerences were not observed related to neural synchrony
between ﬁber types.
Cochlear Implant Processing
Cochlear implant stimulation was generated using emulation s
of CIS, HDCIS, and PDT. The ﬁrst stage of processing for
all emulations was to process stimuli through a bank of
twenty-two ﬁlters with logarithmically spaced center frequ encies
from 125 to 8,000 Hz. Filters were second order with inﬁnite
impulse response with 3-dB crossover points geometrically
positioned between center frequencies. For CIS, ﬁlter outputs
were converted to temporal envelopes using Hilbert transforms .
Temporal envelopes were then used to modulate 90 kHz pulsatile
stimulation ( ∼ 4,091 pulses per second per channel). For
HDCIS, ﬁlter outputs were half-wave rectiﬁed and these recti ﬁed
signals were used as high-deﬁnition temporal envelopes. Thes e
temporal envelopes were then used to modulate 90 kHz pulsatile
stimulation. For PDT , a peak-detection algorithm was used to
ﬁnd local maxima in ﬁltered outputs and a single pulse was
scheduled for the corresponding electrode at that instance. All
electrical pulses were modeled as biphasic with 25 µs phase
durations and an 8-µs interphase gap.
Current Spread
A model was used to characterize the extent that current
spread degrades temporal cues for pitch perception. It is well-
known that the spatial cues for pitch are degraded by current
spread, but it is poorly understood to what extent interaction s
of nearby electrodes leads to smearing of temporal cues. If
nearby electrodes encode distinct temporal cues, and if curr ent
spreads from these electrodes to the same neural region, then
the synchrony of neural response would be degraded. Current
spread was modeled using an inverse law and assuming the
electrode array was linear and parallel to modeled nerve ﬁbers .
Stimulation was designed for 22 electrodes with electrodesspaced
0.75 millimeters apart. The distance between electrodes to t he
closest neuron was 1 millimeter. The voltage at a neuron was
calculated as the sum of 22 voltage sources modiﬁed based on
the inverse law for voltage attenuation. Rationale for using simple
models of electrode geometry and summation of electric ﬁelds
have been described elsewhere (
Litvak et al., 2007).
Neural Excitation
The modeled voltage source after current spread was used to
drive a point process model of neuronal excitation as developed
and described by
Goldwyn et al. (2012) . This point process
model of individual neurons provides a compact and accurate
description of neuronal responses to electric stimulation. T he
model consists of a cascade of linear and non-linear stages
associated with biophysical mechanisms of neuronal dynamic s.
The details of the model are described in
Goldwyn et al.
(2012); but brieﬂy, each processing stage is associated with
biophysical mechanisms of neuronal dynamics. A semi-analytical
procedure determines parameters based on statistics of single
ﬁber responses to electrical stimulation, including thresh old,
relative spread, jitter, and chronaxie. Refractory and summa tion
eﬀects are accounted for that inﬂuence the responses of audito ry
nerve ﬁbers to high-rate pulsatile stimulation. For the prese nt
study, the electrical current after current spread was norma lized
to an input level of 1 milliampere. For each neural location,
neurons were modeled having thresholds from 0.1 to 0.8
milliamperes with increments of 0.05 milliamperes. All other
model parameters for the point process model were as described
by
Goldwyn et al. (2012).
Synchrony Quantiﬁed as Vector Strength
The study objective was to characterize synchrony to freque ncy
and fundamental frequency in the auditory nerve for acousti c
and electric stimulation. For modeled auditory-nerve respo nse,
computed using either the phenomenological or point-process
models, vector strength was calculated based on spike timings
(
Goldberg and Brown, 1968; van Hemmen, 2013 ):
VSAN =
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
1
N
N∑
i= 1
ej2πfti
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
⏐
Where N is the number of action potentials, f is the frequency
(or fundamental frequency) of interest, and ti is the time of
event. In the present study, a corresponding vector strength f or
cochlear implant stimulation was needed to compare synchrony
at the level of the auditory nerve with synchrony in electric al
stimulation patterns (both before and after current spread).
Electrical stimulation is conveyed by cochlear implants wit h
biphasic pulses with cathodic phase durations typically 25 µs in
duration followed by symmetric anodic phases to balance charge.
The total charge per phase was used to control the probability of
neural spiking in the auditory nerve. As such, a modiﬁed versi on
of vector strength was used to account for the probability of
spiking based on charge delivered:
VSCI =
⏐
⏐
⏐∑N
i= 1 qi ∗ ej2πfti
⏐
⏐
⏐
∑N
i= 1 qi
Where qi is the normalized charge per phase of each biphasic
pulse. This metric of vector strength falls between 0 and 1 and
corresponds to the original deﬁnition but with events weight ed
by the probability of spiking approximated by the charge per
phase delivered for each stimulating pulse.
Analysis of Interspike Intervals
As has been described in the literature, electric stimulati on
produces a high degree of synchronous ﬁring of auditory-
nerve ﬁbers (
Hong and Rubinstein, 2006; Hughes et al., 2013 ).
Pulse trains with abrupt stimulus onsets can produce hyper-
synchronization to the ﬁrst pulse followed by refractorines s and
potentially hyper-synchronization not to the next pulse in a
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 4 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 889992

===== PAGE 5 =====
Goldsworthy Synchrony in the Auditory Nerve
sequence but to alternating pulses in the sequence. This putat ive
response to pulse trains with abrupt onsets has been shown in
computational models as well as measures of the electrically
evoked compound action potential. Hyper-synchronization to
alternating pulses would not be detected by vector strength
since only the relative phase of the stimulus cycle is conside red.
Consequently, interspike intervals were analyzed. Interspik e
interval distributions were calculated based on 100 iterat ions of
a 500 Hz input tone that was 100 ms in duration. Current level
per pulse was chosen so that the stimuli evoked ∼ 100 spikes
per second.
Vector Strength Across Frequencies and
Across Fundamental Frequencies
Analyses were conducted to compare vector strength of modeled
auditory-nerve activity for acoustic and electric stimula tion for
pure tones for semitone-spaced frequencies from 125 to 8,000 Hz
and for complex tones for semitone-spaced fundamental
frequencies from 55 to 1,760 Hz (corresponding to musical not es
from A1 to A6). Response properties were characterized for a
representative frequency or fundamental frequency, and vec tor
strength was calculated for all frequencies and fundamenta l
frequencies. Interpretation of results focus on informatio n
present in electric stimulation and how synchrony is aﬀected b y
current spread and neural response.
Effect of Stimulation Rate on Neural
Response
The analyses described in the previous sections were conduct ed
with modeled stimulation rate of 90,000 pulses per second
(pps), which is possible with state-of-the-art cochlear implan ts.
However, the most common implants in use today only support
stimulation rates of 14,400 pps, which must be distributed acr oss
electrodes. Typically, electrode selection is used to distr ibute
stimulation across 6–8 electrodes per stimulation cycle div iding
to 1,800 pps per electrode. Further, there are many legacy
implants that only support slower stimulation. The N22 implant
from Cochlear Corporation can only stimulate at ∼ 3,500
pps (the exact rate depends on the stimulus conﬁguration).
Even with an aggressive selection of only ﬁve electrodes per
stimulation cycle, the resulting electrode stimulation ra te would
only be 700 pps per electrode. To conclude this article, the
eﬀects of reduced stimulation rate on modeled neural response
is examined.
Front-end spectral ﬁltering was implemented using the
same bank of 22 band-pass ﬁlters described in previous
sections. Temporal envelopes including temporal ﬁne structur e
were derived as used for HDCIS, but channel selection was
implemented using an emulation of Advanced Combinatorial
Encoders (ACE). This combination of high-deﬁnition tempora l
envelopes with electrode selection is referred to here as hig h-
deﬁnition ACE (HD-ACE). Channel selection was speciﬁed to
be increasingly aggressive to counteract decreases in stim ulation
rate. Eight active electrodes were used for the 90,000 pps
stimulation rate, six for the 14,400 pps stimulation rate, and four
for the 3,500 pps stimulation rate. Current spread was modeled as
in previous sections. Neural response was modeled for neurons
having ﬁber locations from 0 to 30 millimeters in 0.1-millime ter
increments with the electrode array parallel and 1 millimete r
away. The most basal electrode was modeled as perpendicular
to the 0-millimeter neural location. As in previous sections,
neuron thresholds between 0.1 and 0.8 millivolts in 0.1-mill ivolt
increments were modeled.
RESUL TS
Modeled Neural Response to Acoustic
Stimulation
Figure 1 shows auditory-nerve activity when driven by acoustic
stimulation as modeled by the phenomenological model of
auditory processing (
Zilany et al., 2014 ). The upper subpanels
of Figure 1 show auditory-nerve activity and response metrics
for a 500 Hz pure tone. It has been shown in the literature that
the auditory nerve responds with well-deﬁned tonotopy and
with synchronous phase-locked spiking to acoustic frequency
for frequencies at least as high as 2 to 4 kHz (
Dynes and
Delgutte, 1992 ), though noting arguments and evidence for
phase-locked ﬁring as high as 10 kHz ( Verschooten et al., 2019 ).
The modeled activity accounts for tonotopy and synchrony witha
clearly deﬁned tonotopic response centered on the characteris tic
frequency of the tone. The response exhibits a high degree of
synchronous excitation periodically every 2 ms. The periodic
excitation travels from base to apex capturing the establishe d
behavior of the cochlear traveling wave. The calculated met ric of
synchrony shows that vector strength to the 500 Hz frequency is
high with a maximum of 0.88.
The lower subpanels of Figure 1 show modeled auditory-
nerve activity and response metrics for a complex tone with a
fundamental frequency of 220 Hz. In terms of spatial excitati on
cues, there are well-deﬁned spatially resolved peaks in the
excitation pattern for the fundamental and roughly for the ﬁr st
8–10 harmonics. Above the tenth harmonic, the excitation pea ks
are not well-deﬁned in terms of tonotopic response. Importantly,
the synchrony of the response is also well-deﬁned with spatially
resolved peaks in the patterning of vector strength. Synchron y
near the fundamental is high reaching a maximum of 0.90
near the fundamental. At that point, synchrony ﬂuctuates in
between harmonic components. For ﬁbers having a characteristic
frequency near a harmonic, the ﬁber response is not synchronous
to the fundamental; instead, response phase-locks to the temporal
ﬁne structure of the dominant harmonic (
Delgutte and Kiang,
1984; Sachs et al., 2002; Kumaresan et al., 2013 ). In between
harmonic components, two or more components interact to
produce strong oscillations at the fundamental frequency. Th is
alternating pattern of synchrony to the fundamental has been
referred to as a ﬂuctuation proﬁle and has been hypothesized
as important for pitch (
Carney et al., 2015; Carney, 2018 ).
For ﬁbers with characteristic frequencies above 2 kHz, as ﬁl ters
broaden allowing more harmonic components to interact, the
periodicity of the fundamental dominates the temporal response,
and the vector strength increases with a maximum of 0.97 in
this region.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 5 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 889992

===== PAGE 6 =====
Goldsworthy Synchrony in the Auditory Nerve
FIGURE 1 | Modeled auditory-nerve response to acoustic stimulation f or pure and complex tones. Left panels show spectrogram repr esentations of average ﬁber
ﬁring rate for 256 ﬁbers logarithmically spaced between 125 an d 8,000 Hz. Middle panels show spatial excitation cues as ﬁrin g rate averaged across time. Right
panels show temporal cues as vector strength to the input ton e frequency of fundamental frequency.
Modeled Neural Response to Electric
Stimulation
Figure 2 shows modeled neural activity for three cycles of a
500 Hz pure tone for the CIS, HDCIS, and PDT stimulation
strategies implemented with a stimulating pulse rate of 90,00 0
pps. This ﬁgure clariﬁes how diﬀerent stimulation strategies
encode temporal cues of pure tones into electric stimulation
and how neural excitation is predicted to respond. For this
ﬁgure, only a single electrode was modeled for stimulation. The
driving stimulus is represented in the upper subpanels as a
sinusoid. For CIS, a relatively slow temporal envelope is deri ved
using a Hilbert transform then used to modulate constant-
rate pulsatile stimulation. Importantly, the pulse rate used f or
CIS is independent of the incoming tonal frequency and thus
does not convey temporal cues for pitch associated with the
incoming sound. For HDCIS, the envelope that is derived and
used to modulate pulsatile stimulation is a half-wave rectiﬁ ed
version of the ﬁltered acoustic waveform, which does contai n
temporal ﬁne structure associated with the frequency of the
incoming sound. The electric stimulation represented in the
middle subpanels clearly indicates the encoding of this cycl e-
by-cycle amplitude modulation of pulsatile stimulation. The
PDT strategy does not derive envelopes but instead schedules
pulsatile activity based on peak detection implemented on
the ﬁltered acoustic waveform. This approach is like the ﬁne
structure processing used on MED-EL devices, but the latter
based on zero crossings rather than peak detection. In either
case, the electric stimulation clearly conveys the periodic ity of
the incoming acoustic frequency as a singular electric pulse for
each cycle.
The lower panels of Figure 2 show the modeled neural
response for neurons with thresholds having a range of 0.1–
0.8 milliamperes (with 0.1 milliampere increments) for 201 ﬁbe r
locations. The ﬁber locations, or neural positions, are given
relative to a location of 0 millimeters corresponding to the closest
neuron to the stimulating electrode, but with the stimulati ng
electrode 1 millimeter away from that closest neuron. With th is
range of thresholds and neural locations, the modeled neura l
activity shows a range of responses. For CIS, the stochastic nature
of the point process model, coupled with the range of modeled
thresholds, causes spike timings to quickly desynchronize a fter
having a strong onset response. For HDCIS, the range of modeled
thresholds and spatial locations provides a clear synchrony of
spiking both the pulse rate and acoustic periodicity but noting
that no modeled neurons responded to the last stimulating pulse
of the stimulus. For PDT , the precise temporal pattern of the
electric stimulus produces synchronous behavior in the mode led
neural elements.
Interspike Intervals in Response to Electric
Stimulation
Figure 3 shows ﬁrst and all-order interspike intervals for
modeled auditory-nerve responses described in the previous
section. The CIS strategy produces a high-rate pulse train,
the rate of which is independent of the frequency of the
acoustic input, the neural response does not have interspike
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 6 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 889992

===== PAGE 7 =====
Goldsworthy Synchrony in the Auditory Nerve
FIGURE 2 | Modeled auditory-nerve response to electric stimulation f or three cycles of a 500 Hz pure tone as encoded by three differ ent cochlear implant stimulation
strategies. For CIS, a relatively slow envelope extraction p rocedure discards incoming temporal ﬁne structure, and the d erived envelope is used to modulate
constant-rate pulsatile stimulation. For HDCIS, the envelo pe is “high-deﬁnition” in that it is a rectiﬁed version of the ﬁlt ered input signal and thus retains the temporal
ﬁne structure. For PDT , individual electric pulses are trigg ered based on the temporal maxima of the ﬁltered input signal. The lower subpanels show modeled neural
response to stimulation with the neural position indicatin g the relative position of the modeled neural elements with a value of 0 millimeters indicating a neuron closest
to the electrode array, which is modeled as parallel to the ne rve ﬁber and 1 millimeter away.
intervals representative of the 500 Hz periodicity of the input
acoustic tone. Instead, the CIS strategy produces interspike
interval distributions qualitatively like high-rate dist ributions
recorded from cat auditory-nerve ﬁbers (
Miller et al., 2008 ) and
as previously modeled by Goldwyn et al. (2012) . In contrast,
both HDCIS and PDT produced interspike intervals with
clear histogram periodicities at the desired 2 ms periodicity of
the input acoustic tonal frequency. The roll-oﬀ of histogram
interval counts for the ﬁrst-order statistics and ﬂattened
interval counts for the all-order interval counts agrees wi th the
recordings made in cat auditory nerve ﬁbers by
Mckinney and
Delgutte (1999) . These modeling results suggest that HDCIS
and PDT convey temporal cues for pitch beyond what is
characterized by vector strength. These results are importa nt
because cochlear implant stimulation can sometimes introdu ce
unwanted timing distribution of neural events. Speciﬁcally ,
abrupt pulsatile stimulation may lead to hyper-synchronizati on
to an initial pulse with recovery and synchrony to odd pulses.
Such artifactual response properties would not diminish vecto r
strength but would aﬀect interspike intervals. The results he re
suggest that such artifactual hyper-synchronization to alternating
stimulation cycles is not occurring and that the interspike
intervals produced by HDCIS and FSP strategies is comparable to
that observed with acoustic stimulation (
Mckinney and Delgutte,
1999).
Comparison of Cochlear Implant
Stimulation Strategies for Pure T ones
Figure 4 shows cochlear implant stimulation and derived metrics
for a representative 500 Hz pure tone. The tonotopic aspect
of the stimulus is well-deﬁned with the strongest response
seen in the ﬁlter channel with center frequency of 500 Hz.
The encoding of the acoustic temporal ﬁne structure of the
tone—the cycle-by-cycle periodicity—is strikingly diﬀeren t with
CIS compared to HDCIS and PDT. Speciﬁcally, CIS discards
acoustic temporal ﬁne structure and stimulates using constant -
rate pulsatile stimulation, with the pulse rate independent of the
incoming sound. Consequently, synchrony quantiﬁed as vect or
strength between the stimulation pattern and the tone frequen cy
is near zero. This result is not surprising since it is known th at
CIS discards acoustic temporal ﬁne structure and only encode s
envelope modulations (
Svirsky, 2017 ). In contrast, HDCIS and
PDT have markedly improved synchrony to the input tone
frequency, HDCIS has a vector strength of 0.79 at the maximal ly
excited ﬁlter, while PDT has a vector strength of 0.98 at its
maximally excited ﬁlter.
The derived metrics of spatial and temporal cues illustrate
the eﬀects of modeled current spread and neural excitation.
Current spread, naturally, spreads the spatial response reduci ng
the relative power of the maximally excited ﬁlter. Interesti ngly,
the compressive nature of modeled neural excitation increas es
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 7 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 889992

===== PAGE 8 =====
Goldsworthy Synchrony in the Auditory Nerve
FIGURE 3 | First and all-order interspike intervals for modeled audit ory-nerve responses to electric stimulation depicted in Figure 2. Interspike interval distributions
estimated from 10,000 interspike intervals with the pulse r ates as indicated. Current level per pulse was chosen so that the stimuli evoked ∼ 100 spikes per second.
the relative power of the maximally excited ﬁlter. This eﬀect
is likely caused by low-level ﬁlters not producing suﬃcient
electrical stimulation to reach threshold of modeled neuron s.
The synchrony of response is also aﬀected by modeled current
spread and neural excitation. Since cochlear implant sound
processing used here incorporates recursive ﬁltering with phas e-
delay characteristics comparable to traveling wave mechani cs of
the cochlea, the energy proﬁle for each cycle peaks ﬁrst in high -
frequency ﬁlters with notable elongation near the peak reson ant
ﬁlter ( i.e., the spectral maximum). This temporal spreading of
ﬁne structure results in peak energy occurring ﬁrst in high-
frequency channels with maximal temporal spreading near the
ﬁlter with highest spectral output. Consequently, current spr ead
results in temporal ﬁne structure of one ﬁltering channel to
diminish the temporal precision of adjacent channels. This is
observed in the marked reduction of synchrony following current
spread. However, for HDCIS and PDT , vector strength is higher
after modeling the neural response using the point process model
with variable thresholds. This recovery of synchrony is lik ely
driven by the synchronization of modeled spiking to charge
accumulation on a cycle-by-cycle basis with rest suﬃcient pe riod
in between periods of the encoded temporal ﬁne structure.
Comparison of Cochlear Implant
Stimulation Strategies for Complex T ones
Figure 5 presents a representative analysis of the spatial
and temporal cues associated with complex tones. For this
representative analysis, a harmonic complex with fundamental
frequency of 220 Hz is processed through the three stimulatio n
strategies. The spatial response to the harmonic tone is
nearly identical for the three strategies, with the response
quantiﬁed as the proportion of charge delivered to each
electrode. Note that proportional charge is normalized here,
clinical implementation of PDT will likely require higher cha rge
on low-frequency channels since lower pulse rates require
more charge per pulse to obtain audibility thresholds and
comfortable listening levels (
Goldsworthy and Shannon, 2014;
Bissmeyer et al., 2020; Goldsworthy et al., 2021, 2022 ). For all
three stimulation strategies, the fundamental frequency c learly
produces a resolved peak in the spatial pattern, which occurs in
the stimulation pattern as well as after modeling current sprea d
and neural excitation. Compared to the spatial cues available
in acoustic hearing (see Figure 1), the spatial cues available in
electric hearing are poorly represented beyond the fundamenta l
frequency. The modeled neural response to acoustic input of
Figure 1 depicts 8–10 harmonics that produce spatially resolved
excitation, which is in general agreement with the physiologi cal
and psychophysical literature (
Plack and Oxenham, 2005 ). In
contrast, with only 22 logarithmically spaced ﬁlters, only t he
fundamental and ﬁrst harmonic produced spatially resolved
harmonics, the latter being substantially degraded by curr ent
spread but noting that the modeled neural response enhances the
response.
The temporal cues associated with the fundamental frequency
of complex tones strikingly diﬀer for CIS compared to HDCIS
and PDT. For all three stimulation strategies, temporal cues
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 8 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 889992

===== PAGE 9 =====
Goldsworthy Synchrony in the Auditory Nerve
FIGURE 4 | Cochlear implant stimulation, neural response, and derive d metrics of spatial and temporal cues for a 500 Hz pure tone. F or the electrodogram
representations of the left panels, the electric potential was normalized to a peak of 1 millivolt as indicated by the col or bar and only the anodic phase of stimulation is
depicted. The neural responses were calculated for neuron t hresholds from 0.1 to 0.8 in 0.1 microamperes steps and the cu rrent level of the electrical stimulus after
current spread was speciﬁed to produce ∼ 100 spikes per second.
quantiﬁed as vector strength of synchrony between the elect ric
stimulus and modeled neural excitation with the incoming
acoustic stimulus is particularly high for high-frequency s pectral
regions where unresolved harmonics dominate and produce
strong temporal periodicity. However, the stimulation strat egies
diﬀer in the temporal response associated with the fundamental .
Speciﬁcally, temporal cues associated with the fundamental
frequency of the stimulus are not available in the low-frequ ency
spectral region for the CIS strategy but are clearly present and
markedly high for both HDCIS and PDT.
Synchrony Across Frequencies for Pure
and Complex T ones
Figure 6 shows synchrony quantiﬁed as vector strength for
modeled auditory nerve ﬁbers for acoustic and electric
stimulation. The upper and lower subpanels show synchrony
in response to pure and complex tones, respectively. In each
subpanel, the acoustic neural response is the vector strength
based on the phenomenological auditory-nerve model. The
diﬀerent columns of subpanels show the synchrony of the electric
stimulus before and after current spread and neural modeling
with the point process model.
For pure tones, modeled acoustic neural response captures
the diminishing of neural synchrony that occurs in normal
hearing for frequencies above 2–4 kHz. The CIS stimulation
strategy simply does not convey temporal ﬁne structure, which
is a known design ﬂaw. The HDCIS and PDT strategies
both provide a high level of synchrony in the stimulation
pattern, which is degraded by current spread, but mostly
restored by the point process model of neural excitation.
Neural synchrony does not diminish near 2 kHz for electrical
stimulation, which agrees with physiological data suggestin g
that neural synchrony is higher for electric than for acoust ic
stimulation since electric stimulation bypasses the sluggi sh
synaptic mechanisms of transduction (
Dynes and Delgutte,
1992). The vector strength of response for electric stimulation
does diminish above 4 kHz, which is driven by the electric
pulses not being perfect impulses but having ﬁnite durations
(i.e., the total pulse width of about 60 µs is a signiﬁcant
portion of the tonal period). The most relevant ﬁnding is
that the synchrony of modeled neural response to pure tones
is comparably high for HDCIS and PDT when compared
to synchrony observed in acoustic hearing. The observed
synchrony in the modeled neural response is consistently higher
than that observed in modeled acoustic hearing for the PDT
stimulation strategy.
The modeled neural response for acoustic stimulation is
similar for complex tones as for pure tones. As depicted
in Figure 1, the vector strength for complex tones has two
distinct regions with high levels of synchrony: one associa ted
with the fundamental component and one associated with the
high-frequency spectral regions of unresolved harmonics. T he
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 9 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 889992

===== PAGE 10 =====
Goldsworthy Synchrony in the Auditory Nerve
FIGURE 5 | As Figure 4 but for complex tones with fundamental frequency of 220 Hz.
maximum vector strength across ﬁbers is shown for complex
tones as a summary statistic. For the model of auditory-nerv e
response to acoustic stimulation, synchrony to the fundamen tal
follows the same behavior as a pure tone. Synchrony is
relatively high for the three stimulation strategies. For C IS,
since synchrony is not provided for the fundamental, the
observed synchrony derives from the high-frequency spectra l
region of unresolved harmonics. As can be seen in Figure 3, the
temporal periodicity of stimulation in high-frequency chann els
are in phase and thus are not degraded by current spread.
Modeled neural excitation increases vector strength since t he
point process neurons tend to respond during the same phase of
the charge accumulation. Observed synchrony was higher yet for
HDCIS and PDT with both being enhanced by modeled neural
response. While parameterization of the computational model
will aﬀect results, neural excitation to electric stimulati on clearly
provides temporal cues with comparable neural synchrony in
acoustic hearing.
Effect of Stimulation Rate on Neural
Response
Figure 7 shows the modeled neural response for HD-ACE
implemented for the three stimulation rates for pure and complex
tones. Only the ﬁrst 20 millimeters of the ﬁber locations are
shown since the modeled 22-electrode array only extends to
be perpendicular to the 16-millimeter location. The cycle-by -
cycle temporal ﬁne structure for both pure and complex tones
are conveyed by the stimulation strategy but with noticeabl e
reduction in the amount of ﬁne-structure detail that is encod ed.
These modeling results clarify the eﬀect of stimulation rate
on encoding temporal ﬁne structure into neural activity. Whi le
some degree of synchrony is maintained despite the reduction in
stimulation rate, there is clearly a loss of detail in the res ponse of
the auditory nerve. Psychophysically, a previous study has shown
that cochlear implant users are sensitive to small ﬂuctuation s in
charge density that occur associated with this loss of detai l in the
temporal ﬁne structure (
Goldsworthy et al., 2022).
DISCUSSION
Neural synchrony to incoming stimulation is exceptionally
high in the auditory system. The auditory nerve ﬁres with
synchrony to incoming sounds for frequencies up to two and
arguably as high as 10 thousand cycles per second (
Dynes
and Delgutte, 1992; Chung et al., 2014, 2019; Verschooten
et al., 2019
). This remarkable synchrony was examined here by
comparing computational models of auditory-nerve response to
acoustic and electric stimulation. It was shown that synchr ony to
sound of the most common stimulation strategies for cochlea r
implants (ACE and CIS) is completely discarded for pure tones
and substantially degraded for complex tones, speciﬁcally tha t
the temporal ﬁne structure of the fundamental frequency is
discarded. In contrast, modeling results indicate that sti mulation
strategies that explicitly encode temporal ﬁne structure (HDC IS
and PDT) provide comparable levels of neural synchrony to
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 10 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 889992

===== PAGE 11 =====
Goldsworthy Synchrony in the Auditory Nerve
FIGURE 6 | Synchrony of neural response to the frequency of pure tones a nd fundamental frequency of complex tones for acoustic and e lectric stimulation.
sound as produced in acoustic hearing. Modeled current spread
reduced spatial and temporal cues for pitch perception, but the
point process model of neuronal response increased both spatial
speciﬁcity and neural synchrony. Discussion focuses on how
computational modeling could be used to yield better encodin g
of temporal cues for cochlear implants.
The present article compares modeled neural synchrony for
diﬀerent cochlear implant stimulation strategies with synch rony
observed in acoustic hearing. The ACE and CIS strategies are
commonly used with cochlear implants, but it is well-known
that these strategies discard temporal ﬁne structure of soun d.
The extent, however, that computational modeling indicates t hat
HDCIS and PDT encode temporal ﬁne structure of incoming
sound into synchronous neural activity is enticing. Of cour se,
aspects of modeling such as the extent of current spread and
the distribution of neural parameters will aﬀect modeling resu lts,
and this ﬂexible capacity will allow models to be tuned to
physiological data collected in the future. Since HDCIS enco des
aspects of temporal ﬁne structure into stimulation, and does n ot
explicitly remove that information using smoothed envelopes ,
some extent of neural synchrony will be transmitted. Simila rly,
stimulation strategies that trigger stimulation pulses bas ed on
temporal ﬁne structure such as PDT , FSP , and FS4 will produce
varying degrees of neural synchrony (
van Hoesel, 2007; V andali
and van Hoesel, 2011; Riss et al., 2014, 2016 ). The present
article does not attempt to exhaustively describe synchrony for
all strategies, but to clearly describe synchrony for common
stimulation strategies.
The modeling results presented here incorporate current
spread and a point process model or neuronal response.
Synchrony was degraded by current spread because the front-
end ﬁltering included phase delay like that produced by traveli ng
wave mechanics of the cochlea. If linear phase ﬁltering were
instead used for the front-end ﬁltering—as often used for
cochlear implant signal processing—then stimulation timing
features would be coherent and current spread would cause less
smearing of temporal information. However, it is not presentl y
known the extent that modeling traveling wave mechanics is
important for conveying temporal ﬁne structure cues (
Loeb
et al., 1983; Loeb, 2005; McGinley et al., 2012 ). Computational
modeling can be used to clarify the tradeoﬀs between emulatin g
traveling wave mechanics and minimizing the smearing of
temporal cues for pitch perception (
Cohen, 2009; Karg et al.,
2013; Seeber and Bruce, 2016; van Gendt et al., 2016 ).
There is a rich body of literature associated with temporal
cues for pitch perception in the auditory-nerve response
with strong arguments for diﬀerent metrics to quantify the
strength of these cues (
Meddis and Hewitt, 1992; Cariani and
Delgutte, 1996a,b; Cedolin and Delgutte, 2010; Hartmann
et al., 2019
). Vector strength was made the focal point
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 11 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 889992

===== PAGE 12 =====
Goldsworthy Synchrony in the Auditory Nerve
FIGURE 7 | Modeled neural response to electrode stimulation for pure a nd complex tones for high-deﬁnition emulations of the Advanc ed Combinatorial Encoders
stimulation strategy. The images show modeled ﬁber location vs. time for ﬁve cycles of a 500 Hz pure tone (left panels) and ﬁve cycles of a 220 Hz complex tone (right
panels). The color bar indicates the average ﬁring rate of the neural response. pps, pulses per second.
of the present article as a starting point for comparing
the temporal response properties of the auditory nerve to
acoustic and electric stimulation because it is a straightf orward
metric of synchrony that has been used in basic studies
of physiology (
van Hemmen, 2013 ). Further, interval
histograms were examined and the periodicity information
present in the neural response to electrical stimulation
was comparable to that observed for acoustic stimulation
(
Mckinney and Delgutte, 1999 ). Future work should consider
other metrics of synchrony as predictors of behavioral pitch
resolution as results are better characterized for diﬀerent
stimulation strategies.
The extent that encoding synchrony into sound processing
for cochlear implants will improve music and speech perception
for recipients is unknown. The results of the present study sho w
that synchrony is poorly encoded by conventional ACE and CIS
strategies, but that synchrony can be restored using stimul ation
based on physiology that actively encodes the temporal ﬁne
structure of incoming sound. Behavioral results for strate gies
that attempt to encode temporal ﬁne structure ( e.g., HDCIS, FSP ,
PDT) have yielded promising, but mixed results (
van Hoesel
and Tyler, 2003; van Hoesel, 2007; V andali and van Hoesel,
2011
). The most promising results for such strategies suggest
that prolonged rehabilitation is needed to make use of newly
encoded timing cues, which suggests long-term recovery and
rehabilitation of neural circuits tuned to synchronous act ivity
(
Kral and Tillein, 2006; Kral and Lenarz, 2015; Riss et al.,
2016). Musical sound quality was shown to be better with FSP
compared to HDCIS particularly for bass frequency perception
(
Roy et al., 2015 ). New strategies designed to encode temporal
ﬁne structure should be evaluated with prolonged periods of
experience. Further, optimization of new strategies could ben eﬁt
by modeling how synchrony to sound can be restored ﬁrst at the
level of the stimulation pattern but ultimately at the level o f the
auditory nerve.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The modeling code and results supporting the conclusions of
this article will be made available by the authors, without un due
reservation.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
The author conﬁrms being the sole contributor of this work an d
has approved it for publication.
FUNDING
This research was supported by a grant from the National
Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders
(NIDCD) of the National Institutes of Health: R01 DC018701.
The funding organization had no role in the design and conduc t
of the study; in the collection, analysis, and interpretatio n of the
data; or in the decision to submit the article for publication ; or in
the preparation, review, or approval of the article.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 12 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 889992

===== PAGE 13 =====
Goldsworthy Synchrony in the Auditory Nerve
REFERENCES
Bahmer, A., and Gupta, D. S. (2018). Role of oscillations in audito ry temporal
processing: a general model for temporal processing of sensory informati on in
the brain? Front. Neurosci. 12, 793. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2018.00793
Bissmeyer, S. R. S., Hossain, S., and Goldsworthy, R. L. (2020). P erceptual learning
of pitch provided by cochlear implant stimulation rate.PLoS ONE 15, e0242842.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0242842
Brughera, A., Dunai, L., and Hartmann, W. M. (2013). Human interaural time
diﬀerence thresholds for sine tones: the high-frequency limit. J. Acoust. Soc.
Am. 133, 2839–2855. doi: 10.1121/1.4795778
Cariani, P. A., and Delgutte, B. (1996a). Neural correlates of the pi tch of
complex tones. I. Pitch and pitch salience. J. Neurophysiol. 76, 1698–1716.
doi: 10.1152/jn.1996.76.3.1698
Cariani, P. A., and Delgutte, B. (1996b). Neural correlates of the pi tch of complex
tones. II. Pitch shift, pitch ambiguity, phase invariance, pitch circularity, rate
pitch, and the dominance region for pitch. J. Neurophysiol. 76, 1717–1734.
doi: 10.1152/jn.1996.76.3.1717
Carlyon, R. P., and Deeks, J. M. (2002). Limitations on rate discri mination. J.
Acoust. Soc. Am. 112, 1009–1025. doi: 10.1121/1.1496766
Carney, L. H. (2018). Supra-threshold hearing and ﬂuctuation proﬁles:
implications for sensorineural and hidden hearing loss. J. Assoc. Res.
Otolaryngol. 19, 331–352. doi: 10.1007/s10162-018-0669-5
Carney, L. H., Li, T., and McDonough, J. M. (2015). Speech coding in the
brain: representation of vowel formants by midbrain neurons tuned to s ound
ﬂuctuations. ENeuro 2, 1–12. doi: 10.1523/ENEURO.0004-15.2015
Cedolin, L., and Delgutte, B. (2010). Spatiotemporal representation of the pitch of
harmonic complex tones in the auditory nerve. J. Neurosci. 30, 12712–12724.
doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.6365-09.2010
Chung, Y., Buechel, B. D., Sunwoo, W., Wagner, J. D., and Delgut te, B. (2019).
Neural ITD sensitivity and temporal coding with cochlear implants in an
animal model of early-onset deafness. J. Assoc. Res. Otolaryngol. 20, 37–56.
doi: 10.1007/s10162-018-00708-w
Chung, Y., Hancock, K. E., Nam, S.-I., and Delgutte, B. (2014). Coding of electric
pulse trains presented through cochlear implants in the auditory midbrain
of awake rabbit: comparison with anesthetized preparations. J. Neurosci. 34,
218–231. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2084-13.2014
Cohen, L. T. (2009). Practical model description of peripheral neural excitation
in cochlear implant recipients: 4. Model development at low pulse rates:
General model and application to individuals. Hear. Res. 248, 15–30.
doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2008.11.008
Delgutte, B., and Kiang, N. Y. (1984). Speech coding in the audi tory
nerve: V. vowels in background noise. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 75, 908–918.
doi: 10.1121/1.390537
Dynes, S. B. C., and Delgutte, B. (1992). Phase-locking of audi tory-nerve
discharges to sinusoidal electric stimulation of the cochlea.Hear. Res. 58, 79–90.
doi: 10.1016/0378-5955(92)90011-B
Eddington, D. K., Dobelle, W. H., Brackmann, D. E., Mladejovsky, M. G., and
Parkin, J. (1978). Place and periodicity pitch by stimulation of multi ple scala
tympani electrodes in deaf volunteers. Trans. Am. Soc. Artif. Intern. Organs 24,
1–5. doi: 10.1177/00034894780870S602
Goldberg, J. M., and Brown, P. B. (1968). Functional organizat ion of the
dog superior olivary complex: an anatomical and electrophysiological
study. J. Neurophysiol. 31, 639–656. doi: 10.1152/jn.1968.
31.4.639
Golding, N. L., and Oertel, D. (2012). Synaptic integration in dendrites: exceptional
need for speed. J. Physiol. 590, 5563–5569. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2012.229328
Goldsworthy, R. L. (2015). Correlations between pitch and phoneme per ception
in cochlear implant users and their normal hearing peers. J. Assoc. Res.
Otolaryngol. 16, 797–809. doi: 10.1007/s10162-015-0541-9
Goldsworthy, R. L., Bissmeyer, S. R. S., and Camarena, A. (2022). A dvantages
of pulse rate compared to modulation frequency for temporal pitch
perception in cochlear implant users. J. Assoc. Res. Otolaryngol. 23, 137–150.
doi: 10.1007/s10162-021-00828-w
Goldsworthy, R. L., Camarena, A., and Bissmeyer, S. R. S. (2021). P itch perception
is more robust to interference and better resolved when provided by puls e rate
than by modulation frequency of cochlear implant stimulation. Hear. Res. 409,
108319. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2021.108319
Goldsworthy, R. L., Delhorne, L. A., Braida, L. D., and Reed, C. M. ( 2013).
Psychoacoustic and phoneme identiﬁcation measures in cochlear-
implant and normal-hearing listeners. Trends Amplif. 17, 27–44.
doi: 10.1177/1084713813477244
Goldsworthy, R. L., and Shannon, R. V. (2014). Training improves co chlear
implant rate discrimination on a psychophysical task. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 135,
334–341. doi: 10.1121/1.4835735
Goldwyn, J. H., Rubinstein, J. T., and Shea-Brown, E. (2012). A po int process
framework for modeling electrical stimulation of the auditory nerve. J.
Neurophysiol. 108, 1430–1452. doi: 10.1152/jn.00095.2012
Hartmann, W. M., Cariani, P. A., and Colburn, H. S. (2019). Noise edg e
pitch and models of pitch perception. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 145, 1993–2008.
doi: 10.1121/1.5093546
Hong, R. S., and Rubinstein, J. T. (2006). Conditioning pulse tra ins in
cochlear implants: eﬀects on loudness growth. Otol. Neurotol. 27, 50–56.
doi: 10.1097/01.mao.0000187045.73791.db
Hughes, M. L., Castioni, E. E., Goehring, J. L., and Baudhuin, J. L. (2013). Temporal
response properties of the auditory nerve: data from human cochlear-impla nt
recipients. Hear. Res. 285, 46–57. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2012.01.010
Joris, P., and Yin, T. C. T. (2007). A matter of time: internal delay s in
binaural processing. Trends Neurosci. 30, 70–78. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2006.
12.004
Joris, P. X., Schreiner, C. E., and Rees, A. (2004). Neural processi ng of amplitude-
modulated sounds. Physiol. Rev. 84, 541–577. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00029.2003
Karg, S. A., Lackner, C., and Hemmert, W. (2013). Temporal interactio n in
electrical hearing elucidates auditory nerve dynamics in humans. Hear. Res.
299, 10–18. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2013.01.015
Kong, Y.-Y., and Carlyon, R. P. (2010). Temporal pitch perception at h igh rates in
cochlear implants. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 127, 3114–3123. doi: 10.1121/1.3372713
Kral, A., and Lenarz, T. (2015). How the brain learns to listen: deafne ss and the
bionic ear. E-Neuroforum 6, 21–28. doi: 10.1007/s13295-015-0004-0
Kral, A., and Tillein, J. (2006). Brain plasticity under cochlear implan t stimulation.
Adv. Otorhinolaryngol. 64, 89–108. doi: 10.1159/000094647
Kumaresan, R., Peddinti, V. K., and Cariani, P. (2013). Synchron y capture
ﬁlterbank: auditory-inspired signal processing for tracking indi vidual
frequency components in speech. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 133, 4290–4310.
doi: 10.1121/1.4802653
Landsberger, D. M., and Galvin, J. J. (2011). Discrimination be tween sequential
and simultaneous virtual channels with electrical hearing. J. Acoust. Soc. Am.
130, 1559–1566. doi: 10.1121/1.3613938
Landsberger, D. M., Padilla, M., and Srinivasan, A. G. (2012). R educing current
spread using current focusing in cochlear implant users. Hear. Res. 284, 16–24.
doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2011.12.009
Liberman, M. C., Epstein, M. J., Cleveland, S. S., Wang, H., and Mais on, S. F.
(2016). Toward a diﬀerential diagnosis of hidden hearing loss in humans. PLoS
ONE 11, e0162726. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0162726
Litvak, L. M., Spahr, A. J., and Emadi, G. (2007). Loudness growt h observed under
partially tripolar stimulation: model and data from cochlear implant listene rs.
J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 122, 967–981. doi: 10.1121/1.2749414
Loeb, G. E. (2005). Are cochlear implant patients suﬀering from percept ual
dissonance? Ear Hear. 26, 435–450. doi: 10.1097/01.aud.0000179688.87621.48
Loeb, G. E., White, M. W., and Merzenich, M. M. (1983). Spatial c ross-correlation.
Biol. Cybern. 47, 149–163. doi: 10.1007/BF00337005
Loizou, P. C. (1999). Introduction to cochlear implants. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag.
18, 32–42. doi: 10.1109/51.740962
Looi, V., Gfeller, K. E., and Driscoll, V. D. (2012). Music appreciati on and
training for cochlear implant recipients: a review. Semin. Hear. 33, 307–334.
doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1329222
Lorenzi, C., Gilbert, G., Carn, H., Garnier, S., and Moore, B. C. J. (2 006).
Speech perception problems of the hearing impaired reﬂect inability to use
temporal ﬁne structure. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103, 18866–18869.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.0607364103
Marimuthu, V., Swanson, B. A., and Mannell, R. (2016). Cochlear impla nt rate
pitch and melody perception as a function of place and number of electrod es.
Trends Hear. 20, 1–20. doi: 10.1177/2331216516643085
McDermott, J. H., and Oxenham, A. J. (2008). Music perception,
pitch, and the auditory system. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 18, 452–463.
doi: 10.1016/j.conb.2008.09.005
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 13 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 889992

===== PAGE 14 =====
Goldsworthy Synchrony in the Auditory Nerve
McGinley, M. J., Charles Liberman, M., Bal, R. M., and Oertel, D. (2012 ).
Generating synchrony from the asynchronous: compensation for coc hlear
traveling wave delays by the dendrites of individual brainstem ne urons. J.
Neurosci. 32, 9301–9311. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0272-12.2012
Mckinney, M. F., and Delgutte, B. (1999). A possible neurophysiolo gical basis
of the octave enlargement eﬀect. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 106, 2679–2692.
doi: 10.1121/1.428098
Meddis, R., and Hewitt, M. J. (1992). Modeling the identiﬁcati on of concurrent
vowels with diﬀerent fundamental frequencies. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 91, 233–245.
doi: 10.1121/1.402767
Micheyl, C., Xiao, L., and Oxenham, A. J. (2012). Characterizing the dependence of
pure-tone frequency diﬀerence limens on frequency, duration, and lev el. Hear.
Res. 292, 1–13. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2012.07.004
Middlebrooks, J. C., and Snyder, R. L. (2007). Auditory prosthesi s with
a penetrating nerve array. J. Assoc. Res. Otolaryngol. 8, 258–279.
doi: 10.1007/s10162-007-0070-2
Miller, C. A., Hu, N., Zhang, F., Robinson, B. K., and Abbas, P. J. (2008).
Changes across time in the temporal responses of auditory nerve ﬁbers
stimulated by electric pulse trains. J. Assoc. Res. Otolaryngol. 9, 122–137.
doi: 10.1007/s10162-007-0108-5
Miyazono, H., and Moore, B. C. J. (2013). Implications for pitch mech anisms of
perceptual learning of fundamental frequency discrimination: eﬀects of spectral
region and phase. Acoust. Sci. Technol. 34, 404–412. doi: 10.1250/ast.34.404
Moore, B. C. J., Tyler, L. K., and Marslen-Wilson, W. (2008). Intro duction. The
perception of speech: from sound to meaning. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B.
Biol. Sci. 363, 917–921. doi: 10.1098/rstb.2007.2195
Niparko, J. K., Tobey, E. A., Thal, D. J., Eisenberg, L. S., Wang, N. Y., Quittner, A.
L., et al. (2010). Spoken language development in children following co chlear
implantation. JAMA 303, 1498–1506. doi: 10.1001/jama.2010.451
Oertel, D., Bal, R., Gardner, S. M., Smith, P. H., and Joris, P. X. (2000 ). Detection
of synchrony in the activity of auditory nerve ﬁbers by octopus c ells of the
mammalian cochlear nucleus. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 97, 11773–11779.
doi: 10.1073/pnas.97.22.11773
Oxenham, A. J., Bernstein, J. G. W., and Penagos, H. (2004). Correc t tonotopic
representation is necessary for complex pitch perception. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A. 101, 1421–1425. doi: 10.1073/pnas.0306958101
Oxenham, A. J., Micheyl, C., Keebler, M. V., Loper, A., and Santure tte, S. (2011).
Pitch perception beyond the traditional existence region of pitc h. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 108, 7629–7634. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1015291108
Plack, C., and Oxenham, A. J. (2005). “Pitch: neural coding and pe rception, ”
in Pitch: Neural Coding and Perception, Vol . 24, eds C. J. Plack, R. R.
Fay, A. J. Oxenham, and A. N. Popper (New York, NY: Springer-Verlag),
doi: 10.1007/0-387-28958-5
Riss, D., Hamzavi, J. S., Blineder, M., Flak, S., Baumgartner, W. D ., Kaider,
A., et al. (2016). Eﬀects of stimulation rate with the FS4 and HDCIS
coding strategies in cochlear implant recipients. Otol. Neurotol. 37, 882–888.
doi: 10.1097/MAO.0000000000001107
Riss, D., Hamzavi, J. S., Blineder, M., Honeder, C., Ehrenreich, I ., Kaider,
A., et al. (2014). FS4, FS4-p, and FSP: a 4-month crossover study
of 3 ﬁne structure sound-coding strategies. Ear Hear. 35, e272–e281.
doi: 10.1097/AUD.0000000000000063
Roy, A. T., Carver, C., Jiradejvong, P., and Limb, C. J. (2015).Musical sound quality
in cochlear implant users: a comparison in bass frequency perception be tween
ﬁne structure processing and high-deﬁnition continuous interlea ved sampling
strategies. Ear Hear. 36, 582–590. doi: 10.1097/AUD.0000000000000170
Sachs, M. B., Bruce, I. C., Miller, R. L., and Young, E. D. (2002). biological basis of
hearing-aid design. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 30, 157–168. doi: 10.1114/1.1458592
Seeber, B. U., and Bruce, I. C. (2016). The history and future of neural modeling for
cochlear implants. Network 27, 53–66. doi: 10.1080/0954898X.2016.1223365
Shannon, R. V. (1983). Multichannel electrical stimulation of th e auditory
nerve in man. I. Basic psychophysics. Hear. Res. 11, 157–189.
doi: 10.1016/0378-5955(83)90077-1
Shannon, R. V. (1992). Temporal modulation transfer functions in pa tients with
cochlear implants. J. Acoust. Soc.Am. 91, 2156–2164. doi: 10.1121/1.403807
Shera, C. A., Guinan, J. J., and Oxenham, A. J. (2002). Revised e stimates of human
cochlear tuning from otoacoustic and behavioral measurements. Proc. Natl.
Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 99, 3318–3323. doi: 10.1073/pnas.032675099
Svirsky, M. (2017). Cochlear implants and electronic hearing. Phys. Today 70,
53–58. doi: 10.1063/PT.3.3661
Swanson, B. A., Marimuthu, V. M. R., and Mannell, R. H. (2019). Place and
temporal cues in cochlear implant pitch and melody perception. Front.
Neurosci. 13, 1–18. doi: 10.3389/fnins.2019.01266
Tillein, J., Hubka, P., and Kral, A. (2011). Sensitivity to interau ral
time diﬀerences with binaural implants: is it in the brain? Cochlear
Implants Int. 12(Suppl. 1), S44–S50. doi: 10.1179/146701011X13001035
753344
Tong, Y. C., Clark, G. M., Blamey, P. J., Busby, P. A., and Dowell, R. C . (1982).
Psychophysical studies for two multiple-channel cochlear implant pat ients. J.
Acoust. Soc. Am. 71, 153–160. doi: 10.1121/1.387342
van Gendt, M. J., Briaire, J. J., Kalkman, R. K., and Frijns, J. H. M. ( 2016). A fast,
stochastic, and adaptive model of auditory nerve responses to coc hlear implant
stimulation. Hear. Res. 341, 130–143. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2016.08.011
van Hemmen, J. L. (2013). Vector strength after Goldberg, Brown, an d von
Mises: biological and mathematical perspectives. Biol. Cybern. 107, 385–396.
doi: 10.1007/s00422-013-0561-7
van Hoesel, R. J. M. (2007). Sensitivity to binaural timing in bila teral cochlear
implant users. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 121, 2192–2206. doi: 10.1121/1.2537300
van Hoesel, R. J. M., and Tyler, R. S. (2003). Speech perception, loca lization,
and lateralization with bilateral cochlear implants. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 113,
1617–1630. doi: 10.1121/1.1539520
V andali, A. E., and van Hoesel, R. J. M. (2011). Development of a tempora l
fundamental frequency coding strategy for cochlear implants. J. Acoust. Soc.
Am. 129, 4023–4036. doi: 10.1121/1.3573988
Verschooten, E., Shamma, S., Oxenham, A. J., Moore, B. C. J., Joris , P.
X., Heinz, M. G., et al. (2019). The upper frequency limit for the
use of phase locking to code temporal ﬁne structure in humans: a
compilation of viewpoints. Hear. Res. 377, 109–121. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2019.
03.011
Wilson, B. S., and Dorman, M. F. (2008). Cochlear implants: a remarkable past and
a brilliant future. Hear. Res. 242, 3–21. doi: 10.1016/j.heares.2008.06.005
Wilson, B. S., and Dorman, M. F. (2018). A brief history of the
cochlear implant and related treatments. Neuromodulation 1197–1207.
doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-805353-9.00099-1
Zeng, F.-G. (2002). Temporal pitch in electric hearing. Hearing Research, 174(1–2),
101–106. doi: 10.1016/S0378-5955(02)00644-5
Zhang, X., Heinz, M. G., Bruce, I. C., and Carney, L. H. (2001). A
phenomenological model for the responses of auditory-nerve ﬁbers: I.
Nonlinear tuning with compression and suppression. J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 109,
648–670. doi: 10.1121/1.1336503
Zilany, M. S. A., Bruce, I. C., and Carney, L. H. (2014). Updated paramet ers and
expanded simulation options for a model of the auditory periphery. J. Acoust.
Soc. Am. 135, 283–286. doi: 10.1121/1.4837815
Zilany, M. S. A., Bruce, I. C., Nelson, P. C., and Carney, L. H. (2009 ). A
phenomenological model of the synapse between the inner hair cell a nd
auditory nerve: long-term adaptation with power-law dynamics. J. Acoust. Soc.
Am. 126, 2390–2412. doi: 10.1121/1.3238250
Conﬂict of Interest: The author declares that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be c onstrued as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Publisher’s Note: All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors
and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizat ions, or those of
the publisher, the editors and the reviewers. Any product that may b e evaluated in
this article, or claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not gua ranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Copyright © 2022 Goldsworthy. This is an open-access article dist ributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). T he use, distribution
or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the or iginal author(s) and
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original pub lication in this journal
is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these t erms.
Frontiers in Computational Neuroscience | www.frontiersi n.org 14 June 2022 | Volume 16 | Article 889992